Are you intentionally wearing a black
turtleneck for this one?
>> No. It is actually going to be one of my
carveouts, though. Yeah.
>> Amazing.
>> What?
>> You think I dress up like Steve Jobs for
a Google episode?
>> Well, I thought because of the, you
know, war between Android and
>> I I walk in and there's this like smirk
on your face.
[Applause]
>> All right, let's do it.
>> Who got the truth?
Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Who got
the truth? Now,
is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Sit me
down. Say it straight. Another story on
the way.
>> Welcome to the summer 2025 season of
Acquired, the podcast about great
companies and the stories and playbooks
behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert.
>> I'm David Rosenthal.
>> And we are your hosts. In the late
1990s, Google built the best search
engine for the rapidly growing internet.
With a breakthrough search algorithm,
lowcost servers based on commodity
hardware, and the best business model of
all time, search ads. They turned that
search engine into a cash gushing
business and took it public in 2004. But
then, curiously, they started doing some
things that weren't related to search.
They launched a breakthrough email
service in your browser with Gmail. maps
that were far superior to the current
state-of-the-art docs and spreadsheets
with real-time collaboration for the
first time. Of course, YouTube, then
Android, and their own web browser with
Chrome. Astonishingly, today Google has
15 products with over half a billion
users. Seven of those have over two
billion users. David, that is over 25%
of humans use seven of Google's
products.
>> Just unreal. Can't wait to tell all of
these stories today.
>> Yes. And they've also launched some
colossal failures. Plus to try to
compete with Facebook, Google Wave,
Buzz, and about half a dozen messaging
apps. I don't know, maybe a dozen
messaging apps over the years. Hot air
balloons to provide wireless internet.
And of course,
>> oh man, I forgot about the hot air
balloons.
>> Google Glass.
>> Can't forget about that one,
unfortunately.
>> So, why did they do all this? And as a
business, Google was and still is the
company that makes the vast majority of
their money from ads on search results
on the web. So today, we tell the story
of Google as the innovation factory of
the 2000s, their reorganization into the
parent company Alphabet, and how all
these different products cleverly serve
different business purposes, and also
how it feeds into Google's original core
mission to organize the world's
information. And we'll end this episode
story right at the dawn of the AI era.
>> Oh, you're giving away the end.
>> Oh, spoilers. Sorry. So, is Google a
search engine? Is it the platform
company of the web era? Or is it an
incubator that just happens to have
struck gold with search and perhaps AI?
Today, we dive in.
>> Listeners, if you want to know every
time an episode drops or get early hints
at what the next episode will be, check
out our email list. That's also where we
share corrections and updates about
previous episodes and we are adding a
new bonus. You get to help us vote on
future episode topics. So, the first
poll is going out soon. Sign up now at
acquired.fm/e.
Join the Slack if you want to come talk
about this with us and the whole
Acquired community. Acquired.fm/slack.
Before we dive in, we want to briefly
thank our presenting partner JP Morgan
Payments. Yes, just like how we say
every company has a story, every
company's story is powered by payments
and JP Morgan Payments is a part of so
many of their journeys from seed to IPO
and beyond. So with that, this show is
not investment advice. David and I may
have investments in the companies we
discuss and this show is forformational
and entertainment purposes only. David,
where are we starting this alphabet
story?
>> Oh, I have a very, very fun beginning
for you, Ben. I want to start with a
quote from Russ Hanaman,
>> the fictional character
>> Silicon Valley HBO show. Oh yeah. From
the TV show.
>> Awesome.
>> And the quote is if you show revenue,
people will ask how much and it will
never be enough. The company that was
the 100xer, the thousandxer is suddenly
the 2x dog. But if you have no revenue,
you can say you're pre-revenue. You're a
potential pure play. It's not about how
much you earn. It's about what you're
worth and who's worth. The most
companies that lose money. Immortal
words of wisdom for the technology
world. God, that show was so good. Why
do I bring this up? Why do I start here?
>> Why are you talking about this? Google
is a cash gushing machine. Revenue is
obviously not the problem for Google.
But what was the problem in 2004, 2005,
2006 was being viewed as, in Russ's
terms, pure play. When Google went
public in fall of 2004, the stock shot
up, basically doubled in two months.
Wall Street loved Google. Adwords, the
search business model, everybody had to
own shares. Google had cracked the code
on monetizing the internet. The more
people use the internet, the more they
search. The more they search, the more
money Google makes. Simple, easy, pure
play, you might say.
>> Yep.
>> That is until Google announced fourth
quarter 2005 earnings. Full year 2005
revenue, $6.1 billion. That's almost
double the 3.1 that it was in 2004, the
first year it went public. But earnings
are flat. Profitability is down.
>> Google's now investing in all these new
products and services. Gmail, maps, the
forthcoming Google Docs. Later this year
in 2006 would buy YouTube for $1.6
billion. Wall Street hates this. Hates
it.
>> This is a huge amount of their cash
they're putting back on the table and
betting for the future.
>> So this is January 2006. The stock falls
27%.
Wall Street's like, "God, these guys,
what are they doing? They're messing it
up. Steven Levy writes in in the Plex
that the perception of Google's ventures
beyond search at the time was that the
company was tossing balls into the air
like a drunken juggler. They were a pure
play in investor's eyes and now they're
messing it up. They're adding all this
other stuff. They don't want the other
stuff.
>> Yeah. So then Ben, as you teed up in the
intro, the question is why did they do
all this? And I think the way to answer
it is to start and just tell the stories
of all the individual products.
>> Let's do it. Strap in. I will say,
David, doing the research took me way
back to early acquired grading
acquisitions. This is the cornucopia of
hits of iconic product launches in tech
history.
>> So, the first and probably the most
important here because it sets the stage
for everything else. The first major
non-arch product was on April 1st, April
Fool's Day, 2004, Gmail. The most
famous, infamous, non joke April Fool's
Day announcement of all time.
>> Yes. But it sure sounded like a joke.
Here's the announcement. In 2004,
entirely webbased email in your browser.
You can log in and access it anywhere on
any device. Google search is built in.
You don't need to spend all this time
sorting your mail into folders anymore.
And one gigabyte of storage free. No
need to delete your mail. No need to
clean up your inbox. No need to do
anything ever. And the whole thing is
free.
>> Yep.
>> Of course, this sounds like a joke. This
is too good to be true.
>> The universe at the time is Microsoft
sells sort of enterprisegrade mail for a
lot of money or there's all these free
web-based services popping up like
Hotmail that Microsoft would end up
buying and Yahoo mail and AOL. You get
like 5 megabytes of storage.
>> Yeah. Not even. At the time, Hotmail,
which as you said, Microsoft owns, had 2
megabytes of free storage and Yahoo Mail
had 4 megabytes. There's another great
story from In the Plex that Steven Levy
has. He's interviewing Bill Gates at the
Newsweek headquarters office in New York
shortly after Gmail comes out and they
started talking about Gmail and Bill
can't believe it. He's like offended by
Gmail because he thinks that giving
people all this storage is just
wasteful. You're doing email wrong. It's
morally repugnant to leave all of this
email sitting right on the servers. I
was thinking about it. Until Gmail, the
paradigm for email, people treated it
like regular physical mail. Sort it. You
file away the important stuff. You throw
out the pieces you don't need anymore. I
mean, even freaking Bill Gates operates
this way.
>> Yes.
>> So, Gmail, this is radical. This is a
radical notion of how email should work.
and was also correct. I mean, if you sat
and you thought about it in say 2001 or
so when Gmail starts getting worked on
within Google and you thought about the
combination of the growth of the
internet, which obviously Google has a
front row seat to, and Moore's law, you
would logically come to this conclusion
that the cost of sending and storing and
searching email would asmatically go to
zero. And thus, as that happened, a
whole lot more email was going to be
sent in the world.
>> Yep. So, can I tell you my understanding
of where this story starts in 1996?
>> Oh, I was going to go back to 99, but
yeah, go for it.
>> All right. So, I know you're about to
bring up the name Paul Bukite. Is that
right?
>> Of course. Yeah.
>> So, Paul was kind enough to speak with
me before recording this episode. Paul
famously the inventor of Gmail. In 1996,
Paul was a student at Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland, which
you may also know this, David, famously
was one of Ohio strong.
>> Yes. The first campuses in the nation to
have broadband internet in the dorms and
all over campus.
>> Oh, okay. I knew about the Paul
fascination with web mail starting in
college. But I didn't realize that Case
Western had broadband. So this is why
when you're living in the universe of
broadband everywhere, he was living like
15 years in the future temporarily for 4
years in college.
>> Yeah. 1996.
>> Yes. So he realizes email is kind of a
bummer if it's a thing that you download
and lives on your computer. The
information should just exist at my
fingertips all the time. Bits are
becoming free to move around. So he kind
of gets obsessed with this idea in
college that email should exist on the
web in a browser without ever having to
download it. And he builds a prototype
for web mail when he's in college.
>> Wow.
>> In 2001, famously preipo at Google,
Larry Page feels like Google is moving a
little bit too slow and gets rid of all
engineering managers. So Larry and Wayne
Rosing, who is leading engineering, go
and meet with each engineer individually
to talk about ideas that they could work
on. This tells you so much about
googliness, but it also tells you a lot
about the caliber of the engineers they
were hiring at the time where they would
just approach them and say, "What ideas
are you thinking about? Here are some
ideas we have. Can you just full stack
own this product entirely yourself?" And
so in Paul's meeting, they knew about
his previous interest in email and
web-based mail and they sort of float
this amorphous idea to him and that's
where it comes from.
>> Ah, so Larry and Wayne suggested it to
him. Interesting.
>> Okay. So here's some other stuff that
Paul said. So part of the motivation was
that they were looking to make something
that would make Google stickier. So
you'd have sort of this ongoing
relationship for if there was a next
Google after Google, there was some
reason why you would still have a
relationship
>> which obviously you know Yahoo would
have for many many years even though
there was a next Yahoo after Yahoo in
Google.
>> We still get emails from people with
Yahoo mails.
>> Do you know how Paul found out about
Google in 1999?
>> Oh no.
>> Slash dot.
>> Really? That's awesome.
>> And that he sends an email to
jobs@google.com.
>> Unbelievable. fitting that you know he
gets hired with an email.
>> Heyo.
>> Okay, so 2001 Paul gets to work with
encouragement from Larry and Wayne.
>> Do you know what the original seed of
the code is?
>> Oh no, go for it.
>> Google had just bought a company called
Deja News, their first acquisition. It
was the corpus of all the old Usenet
posts.
>> Oh yeah, then this becomes Google
groups, right?
>> That's exactly right.
>> Yeah. And Paul's working on that. And
part of that was a feature to do real
time indexing of all the posts that
would allow you to search the whole
corpus. So Paul just applies that to his
own personal inbox. The first
instantiation of this is just a search
box to search his personal Unix mail
directory as if it is the old Usenet
posts that they had just bought. That's
the first version of Gmail.
>> Amazing. As he's building on that
though, obviously like the first thing
he needs is a web front, an interface.
Okay, Hotmail's out there, Yahoo Mail's
out there, webmail's out there. It
sucks. It sucks for a lot of reasons.
There's got to be a way to make it
better, make it more performant and
better to use as a web page. And so he's
playing around with JavaScript and what
he can do with JavaScript to make this
application, this web application of
email better. The history of JavaScript
is fascinating. Brendan Ike created it
at Netscape back in 1995. We did a whole
episode with Brendan years ago about
this. The idea behind JavaScript was to
include a programming language as part
of web browsers so that people could
make dynamic web pages instead of just
static HTML documents. The problem was
it was kind of this casualty of the
browser wars with Microsoft and Internet
Explorer and everything that killed
Netscape. So up until this time, kind of
2001, JavaScript existed, but like it
wasn't super popular.
>> It wasn't very powerful. You could do
weird stuff like animate something on
the page, but I would describe it as
toy- like and not a real programming
language, for sure.
>> Yep. And for what the web was up until
that point in time, you didn't really
need it. Static web pages are kind of
fine for most of what's happen. I mean,
even google.com was static. You type a
search into the search box, Google
servers process the query and they send
you a whole new static web page with the
results. But you'd imagine for doing
something like email on the web or any
application on the web, you don't want
the site to reload every time you open a
new email or you create a draft or you
move something around in folders.
>> You might want to move from a website to
a world of web applications.
>> Yeah. But this is how Hotmail and Yahoo
Mail worked. Every time you took an
action, I mean, it reloaded the page and
so they were super slow.
>> Yes. And so Paul's like, "Maybe I can
use JavaScript to make this better."
He's working on it and he discovers a
little known feature of JavaScript
called the XML HTTP request, which lets
a web page fetch automatically new XML
data from a server without reloading the
page. And Paul's like, "Oh my god, this
is gold." And this is the birth of Ajax,
asynchronous JavaScript and XML.
>> So, David, I assumed you were going to
go here. I thought that you get it all
laid up.
>> You've been letting me go. You just been
feeding me a rope the whole time.
>> You trying to tell me that Gmail is the
first Ajax application.
>> Well, the first widely adopted around
the world.
>> That's fair to say.
>> That sort of set the bar for what
dynamic web 2.0, you might say, websites
could be.
>> Yes.
The origin of the XML HTTP request is a
part of Internet Explorer first
implemented by Microsoft and used in
this part of Outlook called Outlook web
access.
>> I think I did know this
>> when I worked for my high school. I
could log in on any computer into my
Outlook through their web access and
that thing used Ajax and I think it only
worked in Internet Explorer. So that is
the origin of why this API exists in the
first place. Ironically for another mail
client.
>> Oh, not just for another mail client.
It's so deeply ironic that this
originated for a Microsoft mail client.
>> Yes.
>> We're going to get deep into that in
just a minute here.
>> Yes. So I mean when Paul discovers this,
this is almost like Google search all
over again when people realize what you
can do to create something that looks
and feels and has all the functionality
of a application that hereto would have
been a program that you installed on
your personal computer
>> or a app on your Mac
>> that maybe you downloaded from the
internet but more likely you went to a
retail shop like Comp USA or
installed on your computer. You can now
just do this in a web browser. This is
incredible.
>> The web is the platform of the future.
>> Yep. So Paul builds the prototype, shows
it to Larry and Sergey. They're super
jazzed. So supposedly Larry and Sergey
become the first beta users of Gmail.
They are the seed Gmail users and they
start using it exclusively as their mail
service within Google. And then by the
time it launches publicly, all of Google
is on Gmail and using it, addicted to
it. And it wasn't called this at the
time, but it's in the cloud. You don't
have to have your mail stored on your
machine or a specific server. You can
log in, access it anywhere on any
network, any device.
>> All this stuff sounds so boring, but it
was completely breakthrough.
>> So obviously Larry and Sergey are jazzed
first because of just the incredible
nature of this product. And Larry
especially, he is a product person and
his view is if we can build a better
product and it's on the web, then it's
good for Google and we should do it. And
that is a huge part of the motivation
underlying Gmail and everything we're
going to talk about. But there's also
another reason and that's Microsoft.
Because Google was doing great printing
money, Adwords, search, greatest
product, greatest business of all time.
But they've got a big risk, which is
that everything about Google, everything
about the web right now flows through
Microsoft, flows through Internet
Explorer.
>> Yeah. Google's entire money printing
machine was built on top of Microsoft's
and at two layers. So to this point over
90% of Google search queries were done
on Windows PCs and 90% were done in
Internet Explorer running on those PCs.
So Google's got the killer app for the
web in search and the thing under them
is a browser owned by Microsoft and the
thing under that is an operating system
owned by Microsoft.
>> Yes,
>> they exist at the pleasure of Microsoft
at this point in history
>> and Microsoft has a different business
model. So Google's business model, the
greatest of all time, is people use
Google search. They discover more of the
web. They spend more time online on
these new sites and services that
they're discovering. As they're spending
more time online, they search more.
Searching more leads them to discover
even more new sites and services, the
cycle repeats itself and Google just
monetizes the whole thing.
>> Yes. And web usage isn't bad for
Microsoft, but if the platform of the
next generation becomes the web and
people are writing web applications
instead of Windows applications, that
makes Microsoft's platform a lot less
valuable versus other operating systems
like say Mac or say a future where we
change away from desktop computers
altogether. Yes, at a minimum, Microsoft
doesn't business modelwise care about
the web because they don't monetize the
web. Microsoft makes money by OEM
selling PCs that have Windows on them
and then Microsoft sells software that
goes on those PCs. So, at a minimum,
they don't care. And at a maximum, like
you're saying, web apps are at an
existential risk to Microsoft. Oh my
god, there's a future application
platform that just doesn't really
require our participation other than the
fact that we control IE. And at least
for now, that's really important.
>> And most of Microsoft hasn't realized
this yet. Thank God for Google.
Microsoft's distracted with the
albatross that was Longhorn that would
become Windows Vista.
>> Yes,
>> a few people in Microsoft realize this,
but Google for sure realizes this
though. Eric Schmidt for Doubleshore
realizes it because he was the CEO of
Noville before coming to Google. And who
is Noville's competitor? Microsoft. And
Microsoft crushed them. So why Google's
so jazzed about Gmail? They need to
build up leverage with consumers, with
users that they're going to demand rich
web applications so that if Microsoft
ever tries to disadvantage Google or
disadvantage web apps and things moving
to the web, really the only defense
against that is if consumers have
already adopted this stuff and love it
and would revolt. And so this is what
Gmail is. Yes. So Gmail developments
trucking along through 2001, 2002, 2003.
This is hard to remember now. took three
years to develop Gmail.
>> Long development cycle. Yeah.
>> To be ready to release publicly and then
it was in beta for like 10 years.
>> Yeah.
>> I think the reason it took so long was
this was all new. There wasn't a lot of
depth of knowledge out there about
JavaScript. Certainly not about Ajax and
XML dynamic refreshing.
>> It was really hard to program. Today
you've got all these nice abstraction
layers, these frameworks that people
have built to do web development that
really didn't exist to make Ajax
applications.
>> Yes. Okay. So, Google's finally getting
ready to launch it. We're in 2004.
There's a couple questions. One, the
service for all the reasons we just
described. Google, Larry, Sergey, Eric,
they want it to be so compelling that
consumers demand it. It takes off like
wildfire. It builds this strategic mode
against Microsoft, but it will cost
money.
>> There's a reason other people don't do
this.
>> Yeah, there's a reason that a gigabyte
of free storage seems a little crazy.
Even if you assume, and I think this is
probably directionally correct, that
because of Google's commodity
infrastructure advantage, they could
launch Gmail at like onetenth of the
cost that anybody else could. Also
remember there's no public cloud at this
point in time.
>> So you'd have to go build your own data
center to do this.
>> You can't just launch on AWS. There is
no AWS. But even assume that Google has
a 90% cost advantage on the
infrastructure side. The state-ofthe-art
is other competitors are offering 4
megabytes of free storage. Google's
going to offer a gig. Sure, knock that
down by 90% but the effective cost is
still 100 megabytes. So how do you get
around being flooded with cost and
infrastructure demand when you launch
it? They come up with the invite system.
>> Yes.
>> And this is so brilliant. I actually
don't know if it was designed as this
sort of prestigious growth strategy
thing that it became.
>> Anyone got any Gmail invites? Please,
I'll do anything.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Please, please, please. Or
if it was truly because of the
infrastructure cost. Either way, it's
just brilliant. When they launched it on
April 1st, 2004, they send out 1,000
seed invites to Gmail. It's a private
inviteonly
internet service. They send them out to
influencers. You know, the term didn't
exist back in the day, but influential
people. Yes. And journalists. And then
each user has a set number of invites
that they can give to other users to
invite their friends.
>> And it was low. It was like five or
something. And then it wasn't clear when
they would top back up. But you'd give
out your five. And then at some point
you'd come in and you'd have five more.
You'd have three more. It was like super
dynamic and very clearly whatever Google
felt like they could give away from
their servers at the moment.
>> Yep. But it was so brilliant. It made it
feel like you're in this special world
of people in the know that with super
incentivized
viral word of mouth growth because I'm
telling you it's a gigabyte of free
storage. It's this incredible service.
They're selling on eBay for 150 bucks.
There was a monetary value to these
things. Yes. Yes. They were trading on
eBay for average price of 150 bucks in
the early days. And so I'm giving you
this gift.
>> Incredible.
>> And look, everybody wants this, but you
need to have the product quality that
cashes the check.
>> Yes. It needs to be a real gift,
>> right? And it was it was just better. It
wasn't just something I'd sign up for
and then churn and be like, "Cool, I
locked in my username or whatever." It
was something that you actually used
every day. or in the words of Larry
Page, passed the toothbrush test. It was
a part of your daily habit, something
you do once or twice a day.
>> Uh, I wish I could only refresh Gmail
once or twice a day.
>> So, David, was this the first software
that used a weight list like this?
Because obviously, it's become very
popular since,
>> I think. So, so that's how they take
care of the cost side of the equation is
not running out of control is the invite
strategy.
>> Well, still not making any money though.
>> That's question number two. How are we
going to make money from this thing?
Because yeah, okay, there's all these
strategic reasons to do it. It'll
increase more traffic on the web, time
spent, people search more, we'll make
more money indirectly, but they still
don't really know that. So, they think,
okay, we need a monetization strategy
baked into the product itself.
>> Yes.
>> Well, how do you make money from
anything at Google?
>> This actually came up during
development. So even in the prototyping
phase, Paul logs into the database of
ads, which it's just funny that at that
point in time, Google's got this big
database of ads,
>> right? Yeah. I'm just going to access
the ads database, you know, all of them.
>> Yes. And these are the ads that would
run when you searched and landed on a
search results page. And so he decided
to do content matching against your
inbox and just show those ads on the
page next to your email. And even though
they weren't meant for that, it actually
turned out that these search ads were
pretty relevant. It actually was a
decent ad to be showing you while you're
looking at your inbox about similar
topics. So he just rolls this out. Even
though all these people in Google are
actually using it as their mail client
at the time, people were pissed. I mean,
people were like, "Are you looking at my
emails?" You know, all the things that
would then sort of come later in the
public actually happened inside Google
first. But Larry and Sergey loved it.
They were like, "Oh, this is so
obviously the answer." Interestingly,
this experiment predates AdSense. So,
Google has the display ad offering for
website publishers that's called
AdSense. That's different than AdWords,
which is the keyword advertisements on a
search results page. AdSense hasn't
launched yet. And there's sort of
multiple versions of history here. How
much credit for AdSense does Gmail get
in discovering this? But it is safe to
say that the idea of display ads that
are content matched against your Gmail
did contribute to the idea for the first
version of AdSense, which are
essentially the same thing, content
matched ads just on a publisher website
instead of the content of your inbox. So
the product launches publicly April
2004. As you would expect, people go
nuts. It is truly a revolutionary
product. And Gmail grows over the next
20 years from that a thousand initial
public beta user seed base to over 2
billion today. And it's still by far the
best email service. Even if you use
another front end for your email, for
your Gmail like superhuman or whatnot
today, you still want Gmail on the back
end, at least as a consumer.
>> Yes. So once Gmail starts to take off,
Larry and Sergey and Eric see this and
they're like, "Wow,
we should do this a lot.
Let's go." Like, let's build as many web
applications as we possibly can imagine.
>> What else can go into the browser that
we didn't think was possible before?
This fires on every single cylinder for
us. Most importantly, grow the web.
>> Grow usage.
>> You grow the web, you grow time that
people spend in web browsers. They will
search more. We will make more money.
And beyond that, with some of these
products like Gmail, we can monetize the
products themselves. Great. Two, we are
building our strategic moat against
Microsoft. The faster that we get the
internet using public to fall in love
with and use web applications, the less
and less leverage Microsoft has over us.
>> To use sort of Ben Thompson speak,
Google realizes the web can become the
point of integration. Maybe the OS isn't
what the whole universe has to target.
The hardware makers, the OEMs, the
application makers, the users. If
applications start living in the
browser, then the web can become the
point of integration. Users just need a
browser and OEMs just need an operating
system that can access the browser.
>> And what's so great for Google because
of their business model? Sure, it's
great when they build and own and
operate and run and monetize web
applications themselves, like they do
with Gmail, like they'll do with maps,
like they'll do with Docs, like they'll
do with YouTube that we're about to talk
about. But if they don't, doesn't matter
as long as anybody does it,
>> right? They just need to be wind at the
back of web adoption.
>> Yes. So that leads to a whole flood of
Google web products and services to
come. But before we tell that story,
>> yes, now is the perfect time to talk
about our presenting partner, JP Morgan
Payments. They're investing billions
every year into technology and product
development. In fact, Jamie Diamond even
referenced it on stage in our interview
last month. This investment has led to
them becoming a powerful engine for
marketplaces, fintech companies, and
platforms to deliver growth, stability,
and scale for their customers. And these
days, the best companies have made
payments infrastructure invisible to
their users. If you're booking a ride,
buying something from a marketplace, or
managing a subscription, the magic
happens when payments feel seamless and
integrated. This is what JP Morgan
payments brings with their embedded
finance solutions. Rather than bolting
on payments as an afterthought, you can
embed the payments infrastructure
directly into your platform without
customers having to leave to complete a
transaction. This makes your products
more seamless. And as we've seen from
Google, the best products with the
stickiest user bases are often the
simplest for users. So embedded payments
are all about integrating payments
directly into your platform rather than
sending users to a separate payment page
or third party processor. JP Morgan has
the technology and capabilities for this
with powerful APIs. But behind this
simplicity, there's an incredible
complexity that JP Morgan takes on so
you don't have to. You can get sellers
up and running quickly, offering
flexible payment options, provide
efficient funds management, and secure
money movement at scale. Plus, they have
advanced analytics. Marketplaces and
platforms can provide payment
acceptance, funds management and payouts
in secure and compliant infrastructure,
all without users ever leaving their
ecosystem. And this reflects JP Morgan's
broader vision. They're not just a bank
anymore. their infrastructure with the
scale, resilience, and security of a
global leader for trust and safety. They
were even recognized as the best overall
embedded finance platform in Tear Sheets
Big Theory Awards 2024. So whether
you're building the next great
marketplace or just need reliable
payment infrastructure that scales with
your business, no matter how large you
scale, JP Morgan Payments is there so
you can focus on what you do best. To
learn more about their embedded finance
solutions and how they're powering
growth for businesses small and large,
head on over to jpmorggan.com/acquired
and just tell them that Ben and David
sent you. All right, David. So, Gmail,
we've got our existence proof of a
Ajaxbased web app. It's going viral.
People love it. We can really build web
applications now. Let's go nuts.
>> Yes. So the next big web apps following
Gmail were maps, docs, and spreadsheets.
All absolutely incredible.
>> And it was not clear that these things
were possible with web technologies.
>> These required incredible technical and
product vision. So first maps. We
actually did a whole acquired episode
back in the day just about Google Maps.
>> The three companies they acquired.
>> Yeah. It starts in 2003, so even before
the Gmail launch when a young associate
product manager APM at Google named
Brett Taylor that Brett Taylor
>> of course of ACQ2 fame Brett Taylor
>> recent ACQ2 guest Brett Taylor. Oh yeah.
Also friend feed founder, Facebook CTO,
coco of Salesforce, chairman of Open AI,
>> former chairman of Twitter.
>> Yeah. Yeah. that Brett Taylor starts his
career out of Stanford in 2003 as an
associate product manager at Google. He
ends up going to Larry and is like,
"We're missing out here." AOL has Map
Quest, which they've just bought for a
billion dollars. And I'm hearing through
the grapevine that Yahoo is about to
make a big push and launch Yahoo Maps.
And so, as you would expect, Larry's
like, "Oh, yeah. Is this a web product?"
Yes, of course. Go do this.
>> For all these things that we're studying
here, there's a business rationale which
might be extremely indirect, but it's
there. This idea of increasing web use
increases Google search, which increases
the money printer. But then there's also
an abstract rationale, which is our
mission is to organize the world's
information and make it universally
accessible and useful. And maps is
squarely in the middle of that.
>> Yeah. Now, the thing was, as big as Map
Quest and Yahoo Maps were about to
become at the time, and they were big. I
remember using them. My parents used
them. Everybody on the internet used
these services. They weren't what you
think of as Google Maps today. They were
static web pages.
>> Yep.
>> They didn't use Ajax. And the whole
point was to get driving directions
>> that you could print out.
>> Exactly. And the business model for
these services was on the printed piece
of paper that people would print out,
you would put ads on there.
>> Yep.
>> It was like a Trojan horse newspaper
business,
>> right?
>> So Brett and Larry and Marissa are
looking at this like, I think we can do
better than this. So they go out and
they buy a little company in Australia
called Where to Technologies which was
started by these two brothers Lars and
Yens Rasmusen
>> who were incredible engineers and they
had built a real time interactive
maps application except it was a
installed desktop app. And so they're
meeting with them and Larry's like,
"Okay, this is what we want, but we need
it on the web." I think actually the
quote was, "We like the web at Google."
And this is how good of engineers the
Rasmusson were. They go off and in I
think three weeks they rewrite and
rearchitect the entire application to
run as a web app and they basically
independently discover and implement a
lot of the JavaScript and Ajax features
that Google was working on internally
for Gmail. Gmail still hadn't launched
yet.
>> Amazing.
>> So Google ends up buying where to that
becomes the core of Google Maps. Around
the same time they also acquired two
other companies. Zip Dash that did
traffic data and keyhole which would
become Google Earth. Now Google Earth
was an installed desktop application.
Ultimately everything that Google Earth
was building would get folded back into
maps later.
>> It's actually not true. I thought that
and just last night I realized you can
still go to earth.google.com and get a
completely different 3D experience than
Google Maps.
>> Oh, no way.
>> It's all in the web now. It's
unbelievably powerful. Oh, so it is a
web app, but it's separate than maps.
>> Yes.
>> Oh, I didn't know that. Oh, I got to
check that out.
>> It's amazing.
>> That's awesome. Yes. Keyhole and Google
Earth, I think, is my favorite part of
our first Google episode earlier this
year that the whole thing ended up just
being a Trojan horse downloader to get
Google Toolbar installed on Internet
Explorer on people's systems. was there
organizing the world's information and
making it universally accessible and
useful, but also it comes with Google
Toolbar.
>> Yeah. The greatest distribution hack for
Google search of all time.
>> Yes.
>> Anyway, back to Google Maps and where
too. February 2005, Google Maps
launches. People go nuts. Live mapping
dynamic web application. Do you want to
know my favorite Easter egg for the
first day launch of Google Maps? I don't
know if you know this. When you loaded
up maps.google.com, do you know what
visually you saw?
>> I have no recollection.
>> You saw a great big ocean and North
America and then floating in the middle
of the Atlantic Ocean, you see the UK
and then there is nothing past it.
>> They hadn't built it yet.
>> They hadn't built it yet. Europe, Asia,
Africa, not included. It's not even like
it's off limits. It looks like there's
an ocean where Europe should be.
How do you decide what the MVP is or the
minimum viable product to ship on the
map? That's amazing.
All right, there's one more really
important piece of maps, which is the
next year in 2006, they released the
API. And this is what really kicks off
the web 2.0
era, Gmail and JavaScript and Ajax had
inspired developers out there for sure
to make richer web apps and people were
doing that. When Google releases the
maps API,
this thing called mashups starts
happening. You remember this?
>> Absolutely.
>> It's now super easy to grab Google Maps
and build stuff on top of it. And it's
really hot and this enables startups. So
like Zillow, Uber, eventually Door Dash,
Airbnb. Think about all the companies
that just couldn't exist without the
Google Maps API.
>> There was that whole web of geo related
companies too. Remember that era of
mobile, social, local, mo?
>> Oh yeah, forsquare and gowala and yeah,
all those
>> all this existed because Google maps
existed. So back to Google's overall
strategy here and adoption of web apps
and sort of building this moat and
defense against Microsoft. This is just
incredible. I mean here's maps itself as
a first class rich web application that
tens eventually hundreds today billions
two billion plus users use and love
every day.
And now here's this API that's making it
really easy to help other startups and
other companies go build great web apps,
too. The lock in just keeps getting
deeper and deeper and deeper for the
web.
>> Yep. And at first, the API was
notoriously free or very inexpensive at
very high limits for a long time. That's
different now. But for the longest time,
it was just this is a part of the
mission, so we're doing it and we'll
figure out the business later. It was a
very sort of founder driven thing. Now,
it's popular to create maps. I mean,
Apple at some point flipped into doing
it and there's these sort of other
thirdparty companies and there's the
Open Street Maps and all this stuff. For
the first five to maybe 8 years, Google
was kind of the only ones that had a
passion for this and a willing to spend
into the giant hole that you need to
create maps of the whole world. I mean
is they incredibly hard data and
engineering problem. And you know they
had to go draw all their own maps from
scratch, acquire the data, figure out
how to get fresh data all the time,
create a crowdsourced thing among
Google, was it Google maps explorers or
something like that? All the people that
would update these things. This is a
extremely googly problem and a founder
bet to be like, "Nope, we're gonna go
spend hundreds of millions of dollars,
billions of dollars on this, drive cars
around, taking pictures of everything.
figure out how to not overshare personal
information on this. Do it dynamically
because you're capturing a huge amount.
I mean, it's just it's a wacky wacky
engineering problem that is daunting and
they took it on.
>> Yep. And we're not going to talk about
this today, but put a pin in for the
next episode is one of the most
incredibly strategically valuable data
assets for the AI era and specifically
for self-driving cars. Yes. But today,
MAPS has over two billion active users
this year. They don't break out revenue,
but estimates are that Maps does well
over five billion in revenue, maybe even
10 billion in revenue. The larger part
of that is ads. You see recommended
places to go around you all the time
whenever you open Google Maps now that
are sponsored ads just like on Google
search. And then the smaller part of
that is from the API licensing, David,
that you were talking about. But this is
a real business for Google today.
>> Yep. All right. Next ones that we got to
talk about, docs and spreadsheets. So
these aren't the biggest Google apps out
there today. I think if you lump them
all together into workspace and ad
drive, it is over a billion users.
>> That whole suite is among their most
used products.
>> That whole uh you call it off office
suite. Is that what you would call it?
Yeah.
>> Sounds like a office type suite. It's a
good idea. Someone should do that.
>> So docs and spreadsheets hit Microsoft
right where it hurts. office. So people
have tried both before Google and after
Google to compete with Microsoft in
productivity forever.
>> Word Perfect, Lotus Notes, Lotus 123.
>> We talked all about that on our
Microsoft episode. By the way, Word
Perfect acquired by and run by Noville,
who is the CEO of Noville, Eric Schmidt.
Eric knows all about this.
>> But here's what I will say, David. If
you were starting on the foot of
competing with Microsoft or trying to
build a word processor or trying to
build a spreadsheet, you would be doomed
for failure. What Google was doing was
saying there is something that is
uniquely possible with web applications
and Ajax in this web 2.0 era for the
first time. And that thing is real time
collaboration. real time multiuser
collaboration.
These were the first
I've tried to rack my brain. I talked to
Sam Chillis, the founder of rightly
which Google acquired which became
Google Docs. He believes these were the
first real time multi-user collaborative
pieces of software in history. It just
wasn't possible before the web.
>> Yeah. Jonathan Rashelle, the founder of
the company that would be acquired that
would become Google spreadsheets,
basically said the same thing. His
comment was, "We actually didn't know if
it was possible to do this in the web."
Google said, "Based on the success we're
seeing with Gmail, I bet we could do
actual spreadsheets in the browser with
real-time collaboration." And when the
Sheets team came in, it was truly an
open question of can we make it so you
and another person can party on the same
very basic spreadsheet at the same time.
>> Interesting. the Docs team. So Docs was
an acquisition. It was a company called
Wrightly that was founded by Sam and his
two co-founders who were great
programmers. They've worked together for
many years.
>> I used Wrightley before it became a
Google.
>> No way.
>> You were like one of very few people who
did that.
>> Yeah.
>> Cuz it was not an independent company
for long.
>> Product launched August 2005. Google
bought the company in March 2006. So you
had about a six-month window.
>> Wow. But yeah, they built real time
collaborative word processing as a web
app inspired by Gmail and everything
that was going on at Google. The whole
company started as, oh, for our next
project, let's explore what we can do
with JavaScript and Ajax and oh, what
would it be like if we put a word
processor on the web? They weren't
actually even thinking about
collaboration at first, but then as they
were working on it together, they
naturally started collaborating and
thought, "Oh, this is the killer
feature."
>> That's funny. That's different than the
spreadsheets team. Their whole thing at
first was, "We're not going to make a
better spreadsheet than Excel. So, if we
put it in the web, it has to be about
sharing collaboration."
>> Yep. And so, to your earlier point,
nobody can compete with Microsoft in
productivity software. One, because
they'd been doing it so long, they had
this feature wall of so many features
that people needed
>> two proprietary file formats.
>> They had a network effect of the file
format.
>> You built your big model in Excel. Good
luck.
>> Other people need to be able to run it
on their installed desktop applications.
Good luck getting somebody to try
downloading or buying a new piece of
software and installing it on their
machine. But three, I mean the biggest
by far the enterprise agreement. This is
Microsoft's whole entire business model,
>> right? You don't have to be best in
breed in any specific thing. You just
have to be a platform with everything.
>> Yep. And IT departments will buy it. And
especially for productivity software,
really all the money is in B2B and work
applications. And so if IT departments
are buying the Microsoft enterprise
agreement, they're getting everything.
Good luck unseeding Microsoft Office.
>> And I'm not sure you could do this as an
independent business cuz think about how
long Google went with these things
before they were adopted by bigger
companies. For the longest time it was
oh a Google doc that's like a thing for
either you use that for your personal
life or maybe like a startup would use
it. But even a medium-sized company you
can't be serious. Get out of here with
that. And Google was basically able to
subsidize it because they had a giant
existing business.
>> You are so right.
Nobody except Google could do this for a
whole bunch of reasons. One, you talk
about subsidizing. Imagine trying to
build this software as an independent
company or really even as any other
company. It would require a lot of
infrastructure, real time multi-user
collaboration in a web app. Gosh, that
seems like really complicated server and
backend infrastructure. For Google, it's
what they do. running Docs and Sheets,
the incremental load to Google's
infrastructure was trivial compared to
search. They already had it built out.
It was super cheap.
>> Yeah.
>> Two, they don't need to make money from
it. This is the big reason why nobody
else could compete. Microsoft has all
the dollars completely on lockdown
because of the enterprise agreement.
>> Big dollars. These small and medium
businesses would of course pay for
something, but those dollars don't add
up to be nearly as big.
>> Right. Exactly. Google though that's
fine. Microsoft can keep all the
dollars. All we care about is people use
the web. And in this instance,
particularly with Office and
productivity,
really this is about putting the screws
to Microsoft a little bit and
distracting them. And from Google's
point of view, this is a cheap
distraction. If this gets Microsoft all
spun up, Microsoft is now all of a
sudden getting asked all the time,
"What's your web strategy for Office?
When are you going to add collaboration
to Word and Excel, etc., etc." They
don't have any answers. I literally
worked on this. My internship was at
Microsoft and I worked on adding headers
and footers to the Microsoft Word web
app. We were porting the Windows code to
have perfect document fidelity to the
web. So when you looked on the web and
then printed from the web, the document
would be laid out pixel for pixel,
character for character, exactly how it
would look on the printed page. When you
have that requirement, that is a hard
hard engineering task and it's still not
as good as Google Docs,
>> right? I love it that this launched your
technology career.
>> Yes.
>> Amazing. But yeah, from Google's
perspective, this is amazing. Microsoft
is now forced to bring their crown
jewels to the web, which they don't want
to do. And Ben, to your point, because
they have to make it look and feel and
function exactly like the installed
desktop apps, this is going to take them
a long time and be a big investment.
Fantastic.
>> And no matter what, it's going to be
more complicated because with Google,
it's install free. There's no licensing.
Someone just shares a Google doc with
you. If you have permission to view it,
you view it. With Microsoft, I remember
at first it was sort of antithetical. It
was like, "But what if I haven't bought
Word? Can I just use Word for free in
the web then?"
>> Right?
>> Is Microsoft okay with that? Am I going
to hit some weird usage tier? Like what?
So, it's confusing for users. It forces
the company to think about pricing and
packaging. It was a master stroke by
Google.
>> Yep. So, fast forward to today. It's
hard to get real actual apples to apples
data on Google Workspace versus
Microsoft Office users. But basically
the way to think about the market is
that Google has the vast majority of
users and usage of productivity software
and Microsoft still has the vast
majority of dollars and that's fine.
Google's super happy about that.
>> Is that true that there's more active
users of Google Workspace than there is
of Office?
>> Yeah. I mean I think if you look at
users of docs or sheets or slides it's
in the billionish 500 million billion
range for each of those. Office I think
has
couple hundred million users worldwide.
>> Whoa. Yeah, that's crazy. I didn't
realize that.
>> Pretty wild, right? But to my point
about the dollars, so Microsoft's
productivity and business process
segment, which is mostly office, I think
LinkedIn is now part of this too. Last
year generated over $120 billion in
revenue. Google reports workspace as
part of the cloud segment. So all of
cloud inclusive of their infrastructure
as a service all the AI infrastructure
all that the whole cloud segment for
Google last year did about $50 billion
in revenue less than 50 so Microsoft's
productivity segment 120 office is the
big piece
>> and that's high margin revenue
>> high margin revenue Google's office
products are some small portion of a $50
billion revenue segment so yeah
Microsoft's still got all the money
>> Google's got all the users and
everybody's happy.
>> But you're so right. Everyone is happy.
This is exactly what Google wants.
>> Yeah. And ultimately today, Microsoft is
fine with this arrangement too. The
ultimate fun KOD though is Sam Schillis,
founder of Wrightly. He would go on to
manage you all of Docs and Sheets and I
think he actually managed maps at some
point too. He is now the deputy CTO of
Microsoft.
>> Careers are long.
>> Amazing. The interesting thing
reflecting on Google's actual business
here and comparing it against all the
things that we're talking about, Google
essentially won search by the mid late
2000s. I mean, I know Bing hasn't even
launched yet, and we'll get to that, but
search was going to continue becoming a
more and more giant market. And so, all
this stuff they're doing, it's like, oh,
we've won, and this market is naturally
going to become large. I guess let's
just fuel it getting larger and try to
do a bunch of stuff under the umbrella
of our mission. But what do we really
need to do? And the slightly more
altruistic answer, I suspect if Larry
Page was sitting next to us, he would
say, "What is the goal of a company?"
The goal of a company isn't build the
largest business necessarily. It's to
fulfill its mission. And yeah, we got a
money printing machine from Search and
we're investing a lot of money still in
Search and making that better. But all
these things fulfill our mission, too.
>> Yep. And I think these things are all
true.
>> Yes.
>> So on the back of the success of maps,
Docs, spreadsheets
really starts to inform Google's
strategy here. And specifically, they've
seen, hey, we can acquire
these web app web 2.0 companies, bring
them into Google, turbocharge them,
offer these magical experiences to
consumers. We get all this strategic
value out of them both on the offensive
and defensive front. We can operate
these things at a fraction of the
expense that it would cost anyone else
to do so standalone company or part of
other big companies.
>> And some of the things we could buy
actually fit into our core ads business
quite well.
>> Yeah. What if we went big with this?
like really big,
>> like something super expensive to run
that requires storage of massive videos
and bandwidth for streaming these
massive videos and lawsuit protection.
>> Yep. Probably also costs a lot to buy it
cuz it's wellunded from Sequoia.
That leads us to YouTube. But before we
do that, now is a great time to thank
friend of the show, Anthropic, and their
AI assistant, Claude.
>> So, as we were researching Google's
expansion here from just search into
being a real platform company here in
the 2000s with Gmail, Chrome, Android,
Workspace, everything we're going to get
to later in the episode. The complexity
just skyrocketed with all these
interconnected systems that needed to
scale to billions of users and keep
information flowing between all the
various products and services that
Google was launching. The funny thing is
how quaint that problem seems today
compared to the scale, speed, and
interconnectedness that you need in the
AI era. If you're an enterprise building
today in AI, you need to deal with all
of this times 10.
>> Yes. So, enter Claude. What makes Claw
different for the enterprise is
sustained performance on complex tasks.
We're talking about the kind of work
that would typically take your senior
engineers weeks, like refactoring entire
code bases or synthesizing thousands of
regulatory documents. I wouldn't know
anything about that. Claude can handle
these multi-hour projects while
maintaining context and fewer
hallucinations throughout. Claude is
actually the most adopted AI within
enterprises when it comes to their API.
>> Yep. That's because Claude integrates
seamlessly with existing workflows
through their MCP connector system. They
have pre-built integrations with tools
like Jira, GitHub, HubSpot, and Square,
plus custom integrations for any
internal system, making Claude your
central knowledge resource.
>> So companies like GitLab are already
using Claude for coding and research
teams use it to process documents that
would normally take weeks to analyze
manually. If you're building the next
generation of intelligent applications,
check out Anthropics Enterprise
offerings to see how teams are
transforming their workflows with
Claude. And we've got a special offer
for acquired listeners to try out Claude
before making the enterprise commitment.
Halfpric Claude Pro for 3 months. Go to
claude.ai/acquired
to get started.
>> And just tell them that Ben and David
sent you.
>> All right, David. The YouTube story.
>> The big kahuna.
>> The big kahuna. Ah,
the most embarrassing thing in acquired
history was our early episode on
YouTube.
>> All right, I have got a proposal for
you.
>> Okay, I'm ready for it. You want to take
it out of the feed? Delete it
>> today. We're setting the record
straight. When we finish this section,
we are regrading YouTube. We are
updating the acquired cannon. It's
happening.
>> Oh, let's do it. We're bringing grading
back, baby.
>> Great. I'm glad you're into it.
>> I love it. I love it.
>> Awesome. All right, YouTube 2003. So,
same time frame as everything we're
talking about here. Gmail hasn't even
launched yet. Google starts working on
Google video. And the idea is that
there's a lot of information in video
and thus it fits Google's mission, Ben,
as you were saying earlier. And also,
well, there's just so much more
advertising dollars in TV than anywhere
else in the global economy.
>> To this point in time, TV was the bulk
of ad spend.
>> Yep. If you go look at some of the old
Mary Maker Internet Trends decks,
remember from this time period, and you
look at the share of global ad dollars
spent on TV versus any other category,
it's just so much bigger than anything
else.
>> David, I am so glad you did this. We are
brothers. I did the exact same thing to
try to tee this up.
>> Amazing.
>> I have the stats in front of me. For
listeners, digital advertising, you
know, Google's universe would not
eclipse TV
until 2017, 2018.
>> Wow.
So, almost 15 years in the future from
when we're talking about here in 2003.
>> Yes. That is the wildest thing that TV
was bigger than digital for that long.
Mary Mer famously had this point that
she made every single year that the
attention was all in the digital
economy, but there was this gap and the
ad monetization hadn't caught up yet.
And it took all the way till 2018 for
the flip to finally happen where digital
overtook television
>> thanks to YouTube.
>> Yes.
>> And Facebook and Meta and Tik Tok and
etc.
>> And the rest of Google too.
>> I know. I know. So this Google video
project
actually came out of the ads or it
didn't come out of engineering and the
rest of the Google product or yeah it
was motivated by hey there's a lot of
money in TV and
>> of course this fits the mission. There's
a lot of information in video. We should
totally do this.
>> Here's how Larry describes it. Google
Video was first launched in 2005 as a
search service for television content.
Yes.
>> Because TV closed captioning made search
possible and userenerated video had yet
to take off. But it subsequently evolved
into a site where individuals and
corporations alike could post their own
videos. They were digitizing TV because
the transcription wasn't as good as it
is today. So they needed the closed
captioning data to make it searchable.
And they were almost like meta-arching.
They were looking for other websites
that allowed people to upload video and
including that in the search results
also.
>> Yep. Sure. You can see how this
conceivably could be a product vision
you could have at the time, but Google
video was the wrong product. The problem
was one, you couldn't actually watch the
video. It was just search that then
directed you just like Google's main
search business model off of Google
video to go consume it somewhere else.
Yeah. In the beginning it didn't even
have a player.
>> Whoa. I didn't realize that.
>> Yeah. Crazy. And the bigger problem
though, well that's a pretty big
problem. Another big problem, shall we
say, was that the focus was on
traditionally produced head kind of
content, not longtail, not usergenerated
content. It was really tied to TV. There
was a press release that said that they
could search the content of TV programs,
find programs containing the content
they're looking for, and discover when
and where the program will next air.
>> Yeah. So meanwhile obviously here we are
in 2004,
five, six,
consumer generated digital video is
becoming a thing either via standalone
new devices like the flip cam that's
coming out from
>> Flip was a startup, right? And then
Cisco bought it.
>> Yeah, my other internship employer
bought Flip while I was there. Yeah,
this is like Ben Gilbert personal
history. But more commonly, so I mean
there were dedicated devices like the
Flip Cam, but digital point andoot
cameras had gotten so good by this point
in time. This is going to come back up
later in the episode.
>> People thought this was the big consumer
electronic device vector before
smartphones. People were really, really
excited about how good and how
universally adopted digital cameras
were. All of a sudden, in the mid-200s,
for the first time, anybody could make a
video at any time.
>> And iMovie was just becoming a thing.
So, you could shoot it on your point and
shoot and you can edit on your computer.
>> That's right. So, YouTube
in early 2005,
three PayPal employees, the PayPal
mafia, actually fairly junior employees
at PayPal, Chad Hurley, Javeid Kareem,
and Steve Chen, leave PayPal and create
YouTube. Okay, Ben, I have two deep cut
YouTube corporate history trivia items
for you. H
>> number one, do you know what YouTube's
original tagline was? The name of the
company was YouTube. What was the
tagline and the value prop?
>> I have no idea.
>> Tune in
hookup.
>> Really?
>> It was a video dating service.
>> I did know that.
And they actually posted Craigslist ads
in the Bay Area for attractive women to
make videos to post as profiles on the
site.
>> Unbelievable.
>> And they got like no responses as you
would expect. Thank goodness for them
and Google though because then they
pivoted into a general purpose video
uploading site that anybody could upload
anything that they made YouTube. Okay,
so that's trivia question number one.
>> Okay,
>> trivia question number two. Do you know
who Chad Hurley, Chad was the CEO, who
Chad's father-in-law
at the time was?
>> Oh, no. I have no idea.
>> Jim Clark
>> of SGI and Netscape
>> of Silicon Graphics and Netscape. Jim
Clark. Jim Clark.
>> Didn't know that.
>> Yeah. So, not only were they part of the
PayPal team and PayPal mafia, like they
had the best adviser of all time. Wow.
>> To navigate the Silicon Valley ecosystem
and the internet ecosystem in Jim Clark.
>> So, the brilliance of YouTube and it
really was absolutely brilliant was
three-fold. One, it was super easy for
anyone to upload a video. So they had a
killer content acquisition model.
Anybody, anytime, anything.
>> And as soon as the servers process it,
we'll put it live. No copyright checks.
Unlike Google video, which would take
one to two days,
>> all about copyright
>> for humans to pour over it, make sure
that it was all good, and bless it, and
then put it live, which of course won't
scale in the UGC era. YouTube's just
like, "Whatever, upload it."
>> Yeah. two, super easy for anyone to
watch a video. You need a really good
viewer in the web app to view the
videos. Google video didn't have it at
the beginning. So, killer content
consumption model. Go to youtube.com,
find something or find a link or number
three brilliant thing about YouTube, see
a YouTube video embedded on another
website. Boom, you're watching the
video. killer growth in distribution
model. And also, YouTube pretty much
from the beginning had great search. You
can search YouTube and find videos that
you're looking for. Pretty quickly,
YouTube became and still is, Google
talks about this all the time, the
second largest search engine on Earth
behind Google.
>> It's amazing.
>> Is searches happening on YouTube.
>> That happened quickly. I always thought
that was a more recent last 10 years
phenomenon. I think that happened very
quickly. YouTube traffic scaled so fast
and so big. So you can see how YouTube
here, not only are they the correct
video platform for the web and just
doing it much better than Google's doing
it with Google video, there's actually
some version of the world where they
might become a real competitor to
Google's core business. If all these
searches are happening, they could add
search for other things on YouTube, too,
>> right? I don't think they had any plans
to do that, but it's the same rationale
of Mark Zuckerberg saying, "Uh oh,
everyone's using WhatsApp for messaging,
whether or not they put in a social
media feed stream. They always could."
And so, it's really dangerous to me for
them to be out there aggregating all the
users and attention and habits when they
always could do something like that.
>> Exactly. Same dynamic. And whereas in
the previous categories of apps that we
talked about, Google had the advantage
of uniquely being able to do it as
Google in a way that startups couldn't.
Here it's a little bit the opposite.
YouTube as a small startup has the
advantage of oh copyright rules, laws,
but I don't know. We're just a platform.
We're just a startup. Anybody upload
anything. Google by this point in time
is a public company. No way they could
behave like this.
>> Well, it's funny. They could, but they
wouldn't. They actually could do it and
stay in business, whereas YouTube can
say, "Eh, whatever." But then they're
going to go out of business because
they're going to get sued out of
business. So it's this really
interesting sort of catch22 of this is
the way to start and get all the users
because this is the best user experience
and at the same time it will not work as
a resource constrained small company
>> once it is started it needs to be part
of Google
>> right
>> yes obviously we're going to get to that
but in the beginning though oh my gosh I
mean the embeds were a beautiful
distribution growth mechanic for YouTube
but people were just uploading
copyrighted video that people could
watch for free. I mean, it's almost like
Gmail. It is so unbelievably compelling
to a consumer when your friend tells you
about YouTube or just sends you a link
or you see an embed page of, "Whoa, I
can go watch Lazy Sunday from Lonely
Island and Saturday Night Live in my web
browser anytime I want for free with no
commercials."
>> Yes.
>> Yes, I want that. And in fact, when
users started uploading Lazy Sunday, the
Lonely Island skit from Saturday Night
Live to YouTube, this is in that brief
phase where YouTube was an Ascendant
startup and not yet part of Google. That
one skit increased YouTube traffic by
83%.
>> Wow.
>> Unbelievable.
>> And so they very quickly raised money
from Sequoia. Is that right?
>> Yep. So it was basically incubated at
Sequoia when the three founders left
PayPal. Sequoia invested right away. I
think it was Ruf both's first investment
when he joined
>> cuz RUF knew them from PayPal. He's also
part of the PayPal mafia.
>> Exactly. And then Sequoia led another
round pretty quickly thereafter because
the infrastructure costs started as you
would imagine scaling astronomically
here.
>> Yeah. So three things that are very
expensive. Two of which are ongoing. One
is a onetime cost. It's the onetime cost
but still expensive is encoding the
video. This might eventually play on
multiple types of devices and multiple
browsers. So there's a lot of encoding
that has to happen. Two then are just
big ongoing variable costs. You have to
store all this video. And the biggest of
all the networking, the bandwidth
becomes extremely expensive and costs
you every single time someone plays the
video. Your biggest cost driver scales
with minutes watched. So that is
eventually going to kill you unless you
have an aligned business model.
>> Yep. By the way, it would also be really
nice if whoever owns and operates this
had its own really good, really cheap
infrastructure with all of these things
built into it.
>> Y
>> So yeah, pretty quickly within a little
over a year of launching, YouTube is in
way over its head. the content issues,
the copyright issues, the infrastructure
scaling issues.
>> It's all exactly what they wanted. It's
going as well as they could have hoped
and it isn't way over its head.
>> Yes. And if this had happened today,
you could probably raise enough capital
from the private markets to address this
and scale up as a company fast enough,
especially with public cloud that you
could probably build this as a
standalone company.
>> Yeah. I mean today you can go raise
billions of dollars as a series A
startup if you're in the right space
doing the most interesting things with
the big market.
>> 2005 2006 not the same kind of private
capital available and of course there's
no way the company could go public with
all these issues or anything
>> right in particular there was a giant
suit from Viacom.
>> Yes. So because of these things YouTube
ends up basically putting itself up for
sale. I mean they have no leverage in
content negotiations with rights holders
and infrastructure is killing them. So
in November 2006 which is less than 18
months after the product launched Google
buys YouTube for $1.65
billion in stock.
>> In stock. I'm glad you caught that too.
>> Stock. Yes. We heard in the research
that after this deal, Patrick Bashett, I
think was the CFO of Google at the time.
>> He said, "Never again." Right? This was
our biggest mistake.
>> Said, "Never again. This is the last
stock deal that we ever do."
>> Google's market cap has 20xed since the
day that this deal closed. If they had
paid in cash, they would have made an
extra 20 times multiple on whatever you
already think the multiple is on their
purchase of YouTube.
>> Yep. The thing is though, this is we
will correct the acquired record at the
end of this section. Either way, even if
Google paid 20 times $1.6 billion for
this, they got a screaming deal. YouTube
is so valuable. All right. I have some
of the numbers from the first few years
that I was able to cobble together and
then I want to talk about some of the
product evolution over the years.
>> Yes. Great.
>> All right. So, Google buys it for $1.65
billion. And interestingly, Shashir
Miraa this week went on the Grit
podcast, the Kleiner Perkins podcast,
and laid out a bunch of data on this.
And I actually didn't have a chance to
reach out to Shashir yet cuz it just
came out, but a lot of this is from that
conversation. So after the acquisition,
he said, and Shashir was the head of
product and basically the CPO CTO at
YouTube, not right after the
acquisition, but within a year kind of
came in for four or five years. So after
the acquisition, he said it was doing
about 30 million in revenue.
>> Okay.
>> So they did have revenue. I believe just
to foreshadow our next chapter that was
in the form of programmatic advertising
that was on the doubleclick ad exchange
that they were using to make money. They
were losing about a billion dollars a
year run rate on 30 million in revenue.
The amount of money they lost was almost
exactly equal to a penny per view. So
just imagine every time you loaded
YouTube in those years, Google would
just flush a penny down the drain. They
got to figure out something to do about
this. So for the first couple years, the
CFO at the time was terrified of it
scaling. Like, please don't scale in its
current state. But of course, there's
nothing they can do. The cat's out of
the bag. It's scaling. And the CFO was
exploring, hey, can we sell this to one
of the other companies who was bidding
on it?
>> That's right. Because Yahoo and the
media companies also wanted to buy
YouTube.
>> Yes. So Shashir says, "We were broadly
known as Google's first mistake."
>> Well, back to my tea up in the intro
being a pure play. Investors didn't like
this for a long time. This was a huge
knock. I mean, gez, when we did our
episode 10 years ago about YouTube, we
said it was a terrible acquisition.
>> Yes. The thing we haven't talked about,
music licensing was really expensive.
They were one of the top revenue sources
for the music industry for a long time.
Maybe even still one of the top few to
the music industry.
>> Yeah. Right up there with Spotify.
>> Yep. So, kind of on the product side of
things early on, as you were saying, the
way that you found YouTube is you would
see it embedded on a different site. You
would click through and then you may
stick around to watch something after,
but then you'd leave and your entry
point to YouTube again was another
embed. Most sessions did not start on
YouTube.com. So you weren't going to
YouTube with the idea of that they'll
recommend something to me. And then even
the people who did go to YouTube.com in
this sort of four year 5year period
after the acquisition 90% of that
traffic was there to search and they
just ignored anything that you
recommended to them. I mean it takes a
long time a to build habits and b to
build out the technology to make any
sort of recommendation or browse or
anything good.
>> Yep. For first with related videos and
then ultimately the feed. And just for a
sense of scale, there was a report that
estimated that YouTube that year in 2007
consumed as much bandwidth as the entire
internet did in the year 2000. So just 7
years before. I have an extremely
similar stat from Shashir, which is it's
a later period. It's 2014, but it's
apples to apples rather than comparing
that '07 to 2000. He said in 2014,
YouTube was 20% of the bits on the
internet. Wow.
>> I mean, this stat, but especially your
stat, illustrates just how much this
thing took off and also just how much
more bandwidth video took up than any
other media type on the internet.
>> Yeah. But the long-term play here
obviously is the Mary Maker slide of
yes, video the reason that it gets
consumed so much is this is what humans
want,
>> right?
>> And you can advertise against it.
>> And Google realized this. So I think
they they were very smart to rather than
trying to continue investing in Google
video to basically say they got the
lightning in the bottle, they have the
consumer brand, they have the attention,
let's just go buy that thing and on a
expected value basis if you're making a
bet. Sure, you could build it on your
own cheaper, but your chance of
succeeding is so unlikely relative to
buying that thing that it's actually a
deal to get it for 1.65 billion plus the
billion that we'll need to invest every
year for a few years to run it in the
red. So 2009 is the year where the
business really starts working. Google
actually discloses nothing about
profitability but that the ad revenue
tripled in one year in 2009.
2010 2011 they turned profitable. There
was a report that in 2012 they were
estimated to make about $4 billion in
revenue but roughly break even. Then the
2012 134 I think they were small
profitable but profitable. Then in 2013
to 2015, that time period on the product
side, that's when things really changed.
So the north star really became users
should go to YouTube to be entertained
for 15 minutes. And it's our job to do
whatever we need to do to make that
true. And a few things really helped
with this. One was the shift to mobile.
In mobile, and remember they were a
launch partner on the iPhone.
>> Oh, we're going to get into it.
>> Okay. There were a lot more low intent
sessions. So people who open the app
rather than clicking through from an
embed page.
>> Low intent being low intent of watching
a specific thing.
>> Yes. It's a beautiful thing on mobile
that you can sort of say I've got
something to recommend to you. And
obviously short form vertical video like
Tik Tok and YouTube shorts and all that
these days is that on steroids. Mobile
also made it the case that any given
user was more likely to be logged in.
That way all the personalization, all
the algorithm stuff works well. They
also adjusted their core metric
internally away from views and to watch
time. And YouTube was very early to the
concept of creator monetization. For a
long time, it was the only place on the
internet where creators could make
money,
>> share revenue with creators.
>> And in our old episode, we sort of
knocked them. We said, "Look, this
business has to give its first 50% off
the top of any revenue it makes to the
creator of the video. That's a way worse
business than say Google search ads or
Facebook who you know Facebook has
influencers on their platforms too all
the meta platforms Instagram and their
rev share if it's anything sure sure
isn't 50% it's probably closer to zero
and YouTube right early on said you're a
50-ish% partner which takes you a decade
longer to get profitable but helps you
build that base
>> just creates amazing incentives for
people to build businesses and careers
is on this. I mean, YouTube is the
ultimate instantiation of the internet
to me and the power that it can provide
to individuals to make a living. It
abstracts the need at all to create or
run a business. It really just
simplifies it down to make content that
people watch, you will get money for it.
You don't have to do anything else in
between. There's a little slight of hand
that you did there, David, which is that
people watch.
>> Well, yes.
>> So, YouTube internally went back and
forth for years on this, and I think
we're sort of in this no man's land that
we've landed today. Camp one is, hey,
the way to make people most engaged is
by getting them to follow creators and
they curate the information sources they
want. Camp two is in algorithms we
trust. It turns out camp 2 is actually
correct, which is unfortunate. It's a
messed up incentive. Most of the time,
if you show someone something that
they're subscribed to or you show
someone something that the very smart
computers have figured out, you will
watch and then watch another video after
that. Usually the algorithmic approach
is right. And so there is sort of this
internal conflict there where they say,
"Yeah, of course you should subscribe,
but your views are only loosely related
to how many subscribers you have."
>> Yep. This is the dark side to the
YouTube economy.
>> Yes. But putting that aside, just the
sheer concept of anybody and everybody
in the world has a video camera today
can create something and if it's good
and people watch it and the definition
of good being the algorithm likes it,
you will make money
>> with no other steps in between that can
only happen on the internet.
>> It's pretty interesting because it kind
of has these two business models in core
Google land. They have the Adwords
business model where they're the first
party media site. Each search result
page is a form of media and they run ads
on that and then they keep approximately
100% of the revenue generated from that
ad. The advertiser pays them and they
share some in the form of traffic
acquisition costs that we'll talk about
later, but it's a largely a first party
ad. And then they have this other form
AdSense and the Google content network
when they show display ads on other
people's websites where they share like
70% of the revenue most of the revenue
out to the
>> the publisher publisher
>> the content owner
>> right who actually is the reason why
there's an ad there in the first place
and YouTube was sort of a interesting
mix between the two they were
comfortable and familiar with the idea
that we can manage a platform where we
actually share a a lot of the revenue
with those producing the content, which
is is interesting. Like, if they had
never gone into the AdSense world and
they were purely a search engine, I
think it would have probably been more
of a fight to try to do this 50% split
with creators. All right. So, there's a
thing that I mentioned earlier, this
notion of people on mobile are more
likely to be logged in than people who
just hit a web page on desktop.
Loggedinness
is essential for YouTube's success.
That is actually new to Google.
Loggedinness is not essential to the
effectiveness as of a search engine or
even the monetization of a search
engine. We've sort of flirted with this
idea. You can kind of hear it through
our episode of things like Gmail are
good because then you're logged into
Google, but there's not a giant lift.
>> It's sort of like a nice to have.
>> Yes. search, especially on the
advertising side, is already so bottom
off funnel,
>> right? The intent is right there. I
don't need to know what your
demographics are. I know what your
intent is,
>> right? You search for a shovel, I'm
going to sell you a shovel.
>> Yeah.
>> That's a stark contrast to YouTube where
the whole YouTube flywheel really only
works with logged in users,
>> right? Not just for serving videos and
content for you to watch, but also for
advertising. This is how the television
advertising ecosystem works. It's about
targeting. You know, why does Chevrolet
advertise on football games? You need
demographic data,
>> right? All right. So, David, are you
ready to regrade the acquisition of
YouTube by Google?
>> Yes. We got to set the context of how
big it is today.
>> All right. So, back in 2016, we had two
knocks on YouTube. One is that it wasn't
a destination site. Narrative number two
was they only get to keep 50% of their
total gross revenue and then they've got
these crazy infrastructure costs and
they'll never be able to outrun them.
Well, they sure have solved both of
these issues. Clearly a destination
site. Actually, more than anything, a
destination app. You open YouTube and an
algorithm we trust.
>> It's what I do every night before I go
to bed.
>> Yes. And you know, it's some mix of
things you're subscribed to and things
you're not, but things YouTube believes
will grip your attention at that moment.
On the infrastructure costs, let's just
start by unpacking their financials. So
last year in 2024, YouTube ads alone did
$ 36 billion in revenue. So half goes to
creators. They have 18 billion left to
play with, and they've had two decades
to figure out how to get their variable
cost down for video hosting, bandwidth,
compute, for encoding, music licensing,
all that stuff. They now do insane feats
of engineering including doing their own
custom silicon to do video encoding.
They also have a whole bunch of crazy
things that they do like change the
video encoding that is used depending on
how many views the episode has.
>> Interesting.
>> So they do like vanilla H.264 264 when
you first upload it and then when it
hits some number of views it switches to
a more computationally expensive to
encode but then smaller to distribute
format and then when you hit another one
when you have like 5 million views or
something then they do it yet again they
re-encode the video and make the file
size even smaller. So they have figured
out all these little optimizations to
make any given stream as inexpensive as
possible on the sort of variable cost
basis.
>> Brilliant. On the revenue side, they
have gotten much better at selling ads
and most estimates is that YouTube is
actually quite profitable. Now, on top
of the 36 billion in advertising
revenue, Google reported that if you
include subscription revenue, so this is
things like YouTube Premium, YouTube
Music, NFL Sunday Ticket, they're now
doing over 50 billion in revenue.
>> Wow.
>> So, David, this now makes YouTube the
second largest media company by revenue
after only Disney.
>> And Disney has so many other things
contributing to that revenue. Theme
parks, cruise ships, merchandise, etc.
>> Yes. So, YouTube is already bigger than
Disney's media business, and this year
will likely become bigger than Disney's
entire business.
>> The question is, how does that revenue
figure compare to Netflix?
>> I'm glad you asked. Netflix annual
revenue for 2024 was 39 billion. So,
they've alreadycliped Netflix.
>> Wow. So, there you go. Google doesn't
release usage data for YouTube, but I'm
pretty sure that YouTube is the biggest
single property on the internet in terms
of minutes spent by humans on it. It's
not
>> I believe that
>> the biggest number of users on the
internet. Both Facebook Blue app and
WhatsApp are bigger in terms of total
number of users, but I think YouTube
probably dwarfs them in terms of time
spent by users on the app. I think it is
the biggest. I could see that
>> human attention time sync known to man.
>> So then the question becomes how
profitable is the 50 billion in revenue
and officially we don't know but there's
these great things called research firms
out there that uh make our jobs at
acquired here much easier. So storied
firm Moffett Nathansson published a
report earlier this year that they think
YouTube does about $8 billion in
operating income. 8 billion a year. So,
I want to diff that against their total
investment into
>> Oh, yeah. Okay, great. This is the way
to grade it. Okay, here we go.
>> Yes. Now, we're getting into grading
here. We're landing the YouTube plane.
>> The definitive acquired regrading of
YouTube.
>> So, as mentioned earlier, I don't think
they ever lost much more than a billion
a year, and I think they got break even
within conservatively 5 years. So after
the $1.7 billion purchase price and the
5 billion in additional costs, Google
paid $6.7 billion. I'd bet it's closer
to 5.56 to own something that spits off
$8 billion a year in profit today and
revenues are growing 10 to 15% every
year. By the way, also since I think the
theme of this whole episode is sort of
like the dual bottom line to Google of
everything they're doing of both revenue
and profits and strategic insulation
versus other large tech companies.
>> Oh, but David, you're forgetting the
third of organizing the world's
information.
Okay, the triple bottom line. There we
go. The triple bottom line. Google
itself,
not including YouTube, pretty much
whiffed on social. really really
strategically good for them that they
own YouTube, isn't it? Now that you know
Meta and Tik Tok exist.
>> Well, here's the crazy thing. They
whiffed on social and then what ended up
happening
>> was social became YouTube.
>> Yes.
>> It's the craziest thing. We don't open
apps anymore to look at what our friends
are posting, a place where Google has no
presence. But you open Meta's most
important property with Instagram and
you look at Instagram's mostused thing,
reels, or you look at Tik Tok, and what
do you see? You see videos from people
you don't know. I mean, it's crazy that
the rest of social media or almost like
userenerated media pivoted into Google
space. Yeah, this was the big D Montto
to our meta episode last fall was, hey,
social networking such as the conception
of it existed in the mid200s and 2010s
is dead. It's gone. It bifrocated into
private messaging and public media.
>> Yes. The sort of middle ground of wide
group of people you kind of know is
effectively dead. It's close friends and
it's I don't really care where it came
from, but it's entertaining.
>> Yep. So you could do a discounted cash
flow on this thing that I just gave you
this call it 6 billion of investment and
now 8 billion growing at 10 to 15% every
year but there's additional strategic
value too in addition to this thing you
just said this becoming the winner in
the short form era they have the largest
corpus of video to train on for the AI
era.
>> Yeah let's go. So Moffett Nathansson
estimated that if this was publicly
traded, it would be worth about $500
billion as a standalone company. And
even conservatively, if you sort of take
media company comps and do a revenue
multiple and you discount all the
strategic future value, it's still like
$200 billion.
So this is officially one of the best
acquisitions of all time. And I am
raising my grade from a C to an A+.
>> I am obviously right there with you.
This isn't a plus+.
>> Now, it's not really fair to say that
it's like turning 6 billion into 500.
That initial 1.7 was largely Google
stock that they traded. So, that had
real opportunity cost, but it's still
ridiculous.
>> Like I said earlier, a screaming deal
either way.
>> Yes.
>> All right. There we go. We have revised
history. Corrected the record.
>> Yes. All right. Well, for our next
chapter, I motion that we go back closer
to Google's core business of advertising
on the web
>> and maybe also
stay closer to acquire its original uh
raison detra of discussing the greatest
acquisitions of all time.
>> We may as well follow up YouTube with
Doubleclick. But before we do that, it
is time to talk about one of our
favorite companies, Statsig. So, on our
first Google episode earlier this year,
we talked about how great the search
business model is and how once a company
takes a lead, it's just hard for anybody
else to catch up. But Google did
something that kept them in the lead,
using data to relentlessly improve the
search experience. Yep. Google really
was a pioneer in the idea of a
datadriven product culture. They took
this to the extreme with a famous
example where they tested 50 different
shades of blue for their links on Google
search result pages to find the optimal
one. They also famously leverage user
data when people correct their queries
to bootstrap the did you mean
autocorrect feature. More recently, they
even opted people into AI search via an
AB test. This obsession with testing
helped Google find a thousand small
product and business wins. It also
helped Google scale its unique culture
where its employees can quickly test and
ship new products and features because
they all have access to great tools. But
for a long time, smaller companies
didn't have access to the same quality
of tools that were available at places
like Google. Now that's changed thanks
to Statsig. The smartest new companies
like OpenAI, Figma, Atlassian, Brex,
Notion, and Anthropic, plus hundreds of
startups that you see and use every day
are using Statsig to build a bottoms up
datadriven product culture. Statig
provides all the tools you need to make
datadriven product decisions in one
place. advanced experimentation, feature
flags, product analytics, session
replays, and more. All backed by a
single set of product data. And using
Statsig isn't just about saving
engineering time. It's about bringing
that Google level continuous improvement
culture into your company. Rather than
arguing about metric definitions or
troubleshooting broken tools, your team
can focus on shipping improvements. And
if you already have your own product
data, Statsig is warehouse native. So
they can plug directly into your
existing data in Snowflake or BigQuery,
whatever. So if you're interested in
giving your product team the same
continuous improvement capabilities that
keep Google search ahead, go to
statsig.com/acquired,
that's satsig.com/acquired.
They've got a generous free tier, a
$50,000 startup program, and affordable
enterprise plans. Just tell them that
Ben and David sent you.
So, double click. Well, if buying
YouTube in October 2006 for $1.65 six
five billion dollars was a lot. Google
decided to
basically double that a few months later
in April of 2007 when they bought
Doubleclick for $3.1 billion in cash
this time, not stock. And this is on the
display ad side of the house. So
Google's got two advertising businesses
at this point. There's Adwords when you
search and you get the blue links that
show up above the blue links and then
there's the off property or the Google
network ads and at this point in time
Google just is operating something
called AdSense which is this ad network
that they've started.
>> Yeah.
>> So Doubleclick actually has a
fascinating company history before
Google that I did not know.
>> Yeah. not a hot rising startup like
YouTube that they bought for, you know,
a couple billion dollars,
>> though it once was.
>> Yes.
>> All right. So, here's the Double Click
story. And huge thank you. There's a new
book that actually just came out by Ari
Paparro. The book is called Yield.
Doubleclick was originally founded in
1995.
>> So, before Google,
>> before Google, the founders were Kevin
O'Connor and Dwight Marryman and their
headquarters were in New York City. The
original idea was twofold. One, build
software that could let advertisers
serve ads across websites. This is
called an ad server. And the network of
websites and media, the advertisements.
When people talk about paid media, it's
the advertisements themselves that would
run. Over the next 5 years, they end up
building and acquiring their way to
being the leading display ad network and
ad server.
>> And they went public during this time.
Right.
>> Yep. 1998. shining success of the dot
industry. However, do crash happens. 70%
of DoubleClick's customers not only
churn but go out of business. A huge
amount of DoubleClick's advertisers were
actually VCbacked startups. Brand
dollars hadn't really spread to the web
yet. Like we talked about, the digital
advertising was so early and so nent.
>> Yeah. It was pets.com that was
advertising on other.com properties.
>> Exactly. They're almost levered on the
bubble is probably the right way to
think about it. So, easy come, easy go.
So, in 2002, after they're sort of
limping along for a while, they sell
that ad network division off for under
$15 million with an M.
>> Wow.
>> So, now all they've got left is the
software, the sort of ad server part of
the business. So flash forward to 2004,
they're this kind of sleepy, slow growth
company with a shrinking market cap. The
ad server, their software was still
widely used, but digital marketing on
the web just wasn't actually having that
much spend flow through it. They decided
to put themselves up for sale. Google
actually took a meeting to look at it to
see if they wanted to buy it. They
decided not to and eventually they sold
it to private equity. Two different
firms, Helman and Freriedman and JMI
Management, bought it in 2005 for about
a billion dollars. IPO day was double
this final price tag that they would
sell it to private equity for. And in
many stories, this is kind of the end of
the story. This is the start.
>> Yeah, it's sort of crazy given the fact
pattern that you just told us that two
years later, Google's going to buy this
thing for $3 billion.
>> Yes.
So, David Rosenblat becomes CEO and he
has a very familiar name that all of you
will probably recognize who becomes Neil
Moan.
>> Yes. The head of product and strategy at
the company, Neil Mohan. Neil, of
course, is the CEO of YouTube today.
>> Yep.
>> So, from DoubleClick originally,
>> many would argue the best thing that
Google got in the DoubleClick
acquisition.
>> You could argue that. Now, here's the
amazing thing. What happens under the
private equity ownership is that they
launch a completely different product.
This new thing called an ad exchange
when the concept of an ad exchange is
first invented. Remember it was very
straightforward before this. There was
just an ad network and some software
called an ad server. The ad exchange is
this sort of brilliant idea that we can
cross route demand between ad networks.
And at first what this is sort of used
for is like the remnant or unsold
inventory. Oh, we've got some page
loads. We don't currently have a buyer
in our ad network forum. So, throw them
up on this exchange and see if
programmatically some people will bid on
it and we'll get more dollars this month
for the same number of page views. But
technically, what was going on is it was
really sophisticated and it allowed for
some crazy stuff to get done. You could
bid in real time, including against the
publishers direct sold ads. You know,
let's say the New York Times has done a
specific deal with Ford, then in a
real-time basis,
>> right? If somebody else is willing to
top forward, then you can displace them.
Yep. Yep.
>> Exactly.
>> Gosh, this sounds a lot like Google,
doesn't it?
>> It really created the modern
programmatic display advertising for
better or for worse. That's basically
what happened here. And as a publisher,
when you start working with an ad
exchange, you can incorporate multiple
different networks, agency trading
desks, cuz this became a big thing with
ad agencies. You can stand up these
complex rules engines. Effectively, what
happened is you sort of jumped in front
of the ad networks. you almost
disintermediated them. You're the lowest
level building block that everything
else has to integrate with and
eventually what started as this ad
exchange that just became used for
remnant and unsold ultimately becomes
the primary way that digital media is
bought on the biggest advertisers with
the biggest publishers and all of course
bought and sold through these big
agencies.
Google is running this little thing
called AdSense. It's kind of for smaller
publishers and it's very like DIY self-s
serve. It's almost like a techie
utopian's version of how do you run ads
on websites. Whereas this ad exchange is
let's acknowledge all the complex
realities that exist in all these
business relationships, all these
purchasing decisions. the way Madison
Avenue has evolved from the Madman era
to, you know, this moment in time in the
early 2000s.
>> And let's essentially construct fat
pipes for money to flow
>> through all this. And what I mean by
that is direct integrations into ad
agencies financial systems and the ad
agencies control the budgets for all the
big brands and all the big dollars that
are flowing.
>> That's exactly right. So, if only Google
had a way of unlocking and now
participating in these deeply integrated
money flows, Google had a few other
problems. The way DoubleClick worked and
performed a lot of really fancy stuff
like frequency capping to make sure you
don't see the same ad 46 times is third
party cookies. Google was
philosophically opposed to using third
party cookies, so they couldn't do stuff
like that, but DoubleClick could. Google
didn't have a lot of these big sales
relationships since at the time again
they're very obsessed with self-s serve
web pages. Advertisers just log in and
upload and transact. So Google ends up
kind of locked out of the best ad
inventory. Advertisers on Google could
really only be placed on the long tale
of websites which advertisers were
willing to pay less to appear on those
websites.
>> Again, we're all in the AdSense part of
the world, not search ads. Yes, there's
all sorts of things that make them not
enterprisegrade here. So, Google decided
they'd like to buy DoubleClick.
>> Yes. Well, that's sort of the story out
there. The reality is, think back to how
you started and when I interjected and I
said, gosh, a lot of what Doubleclick is
doing, it really sounds a lot like what
Google is doing, right? Well, we were
talking to Tim Armstrong for research
for this episode. Tim of course was head
of sales at Google for many years and we
were asking Tim about Double Click and
he was like well
I was close with the Double Click guys
and I wanted to meet with them here in
kind of late 2006 early 2007 and just so
happened I was going to be in Seattle
for some stuff and I was emailing with
them and they were like uh oh you're in
Seattle actually we're in Seattle too
right now we can get together here. Tim
immediately sounds the alarm inside
Google to Eric and Larry.
>> They're in Seattle. Why are they in
Seattle?
>> This is a New York based company. There
is only one reason why the DoubleClick
guys are going to be in Seattle, and
that would be if Microsoft is going to
buy the company.
>> Yep. Now, back to everything we've been
talking about all episode. What does
Google absolutely not want to have
happen here? Well, one was Microsoft to
kneecap them by making changes to
Internet Explorer or Windows or whatnot.
They basically neutralized that through
the whole web app web 2.0 strategy. Now
the threat is, oh, Microsoft is finally
going to wake up and do what they should
have done 10 years ago and compete with
us, build their own search engine,
>> right? Be willing to be an adbased
business. Their DNA was, "Yeah, we'll do
some ad stuff and MSN kind of has to
because it's a media business, but
>> we sell software.
>> We sell software. That's what we do
primarily. And we would never trade our
ability to sell software to make money
on dirty ads."
>> Yep. Well,
>> Microsoft is realizing that for some set
of users, Google's actually making more
money on any given PC user than
Microsoft is. And they're not happy with
this. And say, "Fine, we at least just
need to be in that game, too." Yep.
>> So, the negotiations are kind of
happening with Microsoft and
DoubleClick. Tim told us this great
anecdote where he's invited to present
and he still thinks it's like a early
stage conversation in the negotiations
and somehow he gets sent to the wrong
floor. The person who is escorting him
into the Doubleclick building sent them
to a floor and they sort of freak out
when the door opens and they're like
trying to close the door like please go
to the other floor. And Tim is like
what's going on here? He steps out. He
runs down the hall and he sees a
conference room full of all the
Microsoft people and their accountants
and their lawyers and he's like, "Oh my
god, oh my god, you guys, you're you're
about to sign this deal with Microsoft.
You got to." So he gets them to hold off
so he can kick the tires, do his
diligence, submit a counter bid. This is
a crazy process that goes back and
forth. Yahoo gets involved. There's a
whole presentation series that happens
where Yahoo, Microsoft, AOL, and Google
are basically all getting the pitch and
DoubleClick is now.
>> I'm imagining they're all like in an
auditorium and Double Click is
presenting on stage.
>> Dude, there was a spreadsheet called
YMAG.XLS.
And the reason they've created it is
they're effectively trying to show in
each of these presentations, here's how
much incremental money you'll make if
you own DoubleClick and you tie it into
your existing ad system. And they're
tweaking the numbers slightly for each
one. So Google then submits their LOI
for $3.1 billion.
And it includes a clause where they
can't shop the deal around during this
diligence period. And so the whole
Google team goes to New York. They rent
out this big room at a hotel near Double
Click's offices. And I'm going to read
an excerpt from the book Yield. The
company's council, this is Double Click,
checked her Blackberry and held it up
for David Rosenblat to see. There was an
incoming message from Microsoft's
corporate development team. They were
willing to match the offer for
DoubleClick and the message included an
email from Steve Balmer saying that he
opened the door for a much higher offer.
Balmer wrote that if the offer match was
not acceptable, Doubleclick should
simply mark up the paper to meet its
needs and then sign it and Microsoft
would review and rapidly countersign to
close the deal with minimal negotiation
required. Without saying so, Balmer was
communicating, "Here's a blank check.
Tell me what closes the deal."
Ultimately, a week goes by and they're
in this period where they can't really
respond and they're supposed to just
kind of proceed with Google. And a day
before the LOI is set to expire, the
DoubleClick team gets an updated term
sheet from Google. The financial terms
of the deal are unchanged at 3.1
billion. But now the deal includes what
they call a hell or high water clause,
which means that Google was committed to
closing the deal without any substantive
diligence or any other conditions. It's
just money in the bank. So no more
diligence. Doubleclick just signs it.
3.1 billion. And the private equity firm
turns that 1 billion, which was levered.
It was something like 300 million of
equity and 700 million of debt into a
$3.1 billion sale to Google. Then it's
over.
>> Not bad work if you can get it.
>> Nope.
>> So this was huge for Google. Doubleclick
bringing it into Google did really help
with those fat money pipes as I was
saying of dollar flows from ad agencies.
>> Yep. But the biggest thing was
DoubleClick was the number one player in
the space. There was another company,
public company called Aquaniv that was
the number two player
>> which Microsoft then bought for twice as
much. They were like, "We really wish we
had gotten Double Click." And then
within months,
>> it was the next month. Right away,
Microsoft turned around and bought a
Quanivive for $6 billion. So twice the
price. But Microsoft getting the number
two player versus the number one player
slowed them down. We're heading right
into Microsoft search efforts with Yahoo
and then ultimately Bing and getting
into the advertising business worth
every penny to Google even for the sole
reason of keeping the premier number one
player in the display ad space out of
Microsoft's hands. Yep. Okay. Hey, the
one thing I will say here, David, is
unlike all those other Google products,
maps, Gmail,
YouTube, the organizing the world's
information. This is not organizing the
world's information and making
universally accessible. This is we're
running an ad business and we want to
expand the ad business and so we're
going to expand and protect our business
interest by buying this. And it's a
chess piece on the table that it being
in our hands versus other people's hands
is better.
>> That's exactly right. And there's ways
that it like systematically advantages
you to own the exchange when you also
own the network. And this is only
checking the box of strengthening our
business without checking any of the
other boxes. And you basically never
heard Google executives get up on a
stage where they're inspiring people
about the future of the company and talk
about basically anything Doubleclick is
doing.
>> Yes. Correct. And you know, even fast
forward today, unlike YouTube, it's not
like this has become a world dominating
thing,
>> right? If you're in the display ads
world or you're a publisher or this
feels like a huge deal. If you're
Google, let's just look at the numbers
today. Google in total in 2024
made 350 billion of revenue. About 200
billion of that is from Google search.
About 30 billion of that is from Google
network. This falls under Google
network.
>> Plenty of which existed before and would
have existed anyway in AdSense
regardless.
>> I don't know about that. I don't know
that Google would have become the
dominant player in display ads
>> absent double click
>> without buying double click. Yeah. I
don't think
>> Yeah. Yeah. But AdSense was probably
doing a billion plus in revenue at the
time. would have kept scaling. So all
that to say like in the context of
Google, this isn't a YouTube.
>> It just doesn't matter that much. Yeah.
200 billion in revenue they make from
search where they get to keep 90ish% of
that, you know, after paying out traffic
acquisition costs. Google Network, they
pay out 70%. And they only made 30
billion. So if you start thinking about
like gross profit, it's comparing
$9 billion to $175ish
billion.
>> Yep.
>> It's just not that consequential to the
story.
>> All right. So speaking of search, catch
us up on how the search business is
doing during these years and why
Microsoft finally said like, "Okay,
enough. We got to enter this business
ourselves."
>> Yeah. So, we've been talking about kind
of the sideshows like trying to add wind
to the sales of the web and search is
cranking on improvements to the core
product and revenue is growing up right
along with it. So, here's a little
timeline to catch us up 03 to08. They
start updating the index more often. So,
the index starts to feel not quite real
time, but it used to be that when you
would search, you would be getting
results that were indexed 3 months ago.
Now, the web is feeling a little bit
more uh
>> real timey,
>> recent when you're searching it. They
launched Google images, Google News,
Google Books, Google Scholar. They
launched Google Suggest, which is when
it starts autocompleting your searches.
And later they would launch something
called Google Instant, which was very
cool at the time. It's actually kind of
gone away now, where it would run a
completely new search based on every
character you typed and show you the
results page updated in real time with
each next keystroke, which was pretty
amazing.
>> I remember that being so cool when it
launched.
>> Yeah. In 2005 they incorporate your
search history into your results. So
this is when they start doing some
personalization stuff with logged in
users. They go from in ' 04 they had
three billion in revenue. 05 they have 6
billion in revenue. So doubled even at
that scale. In 2007 they launched
universal search across web images video
you know whatever maps. They try to
deconstruct your query and understand
which of these things are you looking
for rather than they used to basically
build a completely separate search
engine for each media type and then
leave it up to you to decide which thing
to go search. That year when they
launched universal search they do 16.5
billion in revenue. This 2007 year this
is when they become the largest seller
of advertisements in the world. Not just
digital ads ads. And digital ads would
not overtake traditional media until
2018 as we talked about earlier.
>> Yeah, I was trying to square this. So I
guess that means that the market share
that Google has of digital ads is so
high massive that it's bigger than even
in the traditional space or the TV space
what any one player has.
>> Yes. So every year for the last 18
years, Google has been the number one
seller of advertising of any kind in the
world.
>> Wow.
This I think helps you understand a
little bit what's at stake in the era of
AI. I mean this is literally the
trillion or five or 10 trillion dollar
question is can Google keep being the
number one seller of advertising in the
world even through this sea change. We
should do a whole episode on that
probably. Maybe we'll maybe for next
time.
>> But actually there's some great
corlaries with the mobile wave that
we're about to talk about. And then just
to pull forward a few more search
improvements that they would do later in
2009, that's when they really do some
real- time indexing of the web. 2012
they launched the knowledge graph. So
when you search about a basically a
thing with a Wikipedia page, you always
get the kind of snapshot view on the
right hand side of that entity. And so
all along the way they're tweaking the
algorithm in an attempt to reduce spam.
That's effectively the product changes
on the people side of things. They
really had solidified themselves as the
preeminent computer science research
company at this point. I mean, if you
were to refer in 2008 to like a really
smart programmer, you probably said,
"Oh, they, you know, they're like a
Google type engineer. They sort of took
the mantle from Microsoft and had not
yet relinquished it to Facebook or later
to the Stripe or OpenAI or Anthropic or
any of the sort of companies we would
talk about in the future as this like
dense concentration of the best
engineers." and they had pulled in a lot
of the people from the big research labs
that had been collapsing. So you had
Jeff Dean and Sanjay Gemma coming from
deck. David, we did Sanjay a total
disservice on the last episode. A lot of
the stuff that Jeff did and of course he
became sort of a Google executive. Jeff
and Sanjay peer programmed together.
>> Yes, there's an amazing New Yorker
article that was published long ago
about their friendship and career
partnership and everything that they
accomplished together.
>> Yeah, we'll link to it in the show
notes. And basically if you look at any
big research paper about giant Google
infrastructure stuff that was launched
from I don't know 2002ish
maybe even earlier through the 201s.
Jeff and Sanjay are either the two
authors or two of the five authors. I
mean it's amazing how much stuff these
two guys invented. They also got Bill
Corin and Rob Pike from Bell Labs. you
had Xerox Park and IBM's labs were sort
of losing prominence and Google's just
sucking in all this generational
heavyhitter computer science
architecture systems programmers from
all of those. And so I think that's sort
of how I would describe where a lot of
the technical breakthroughs are really
coming from or at least the culture of
technical breakthroughs. We talked about
these incredible products, incredible
innovations,
development of the whole concept of a
web application, but that was coming
from these people that were coming into
the company who were just like you say,
generational talents. Speaking of, that
was very convenient for a couple things
that they needed to start doing in 2008.
namely launching their own web browser
and then shortly thereafter launching
their own mobile operating system.
>> It's astonishing that they did both of
these things
>> in the same year.
>> And this isn't like, oh, I'm going to
start a browser the way that you can
start a browser today. I mean, the all
these AI companies are launching
browsers.
>> Yeah, they're using Chromium,
>> right? This is a giant engineering
undertaking. You need amazing
architects. I mean this is equivalent to
Dave Cutler doing Windows NT. I mean it
was earthshattering when Google launched
Chrome
>> or everything Jeff Dean and Sanjay did
in the early days of Google.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. And when I say people launching
web browsers today are using Chromium,
Chromium of course is the open- source
version of Chrome.
>> Yeah.
>> That Google just gives away for free to
anybody. That didn't exist. They had to
build it.
So, in February of 2008, the shoe that
Google had been fearing would drop for
many, many years finally does drop,
which is Microsoft is officially going
to enter the search business. They make
a bid, Microsoft does, to buy Yahoo for
$44 billion. The giant has finally woken
up. Fortunately for Google, they get a
little bit of a reprieve because Jerry
Yang turns it down.
>> So dumb
>> in one of the worst corporate decisions
of all time because just two years
later, Bing, after Microsoft would
launch Bing the next year, in June of
2009, Bing would take over powering
Yahoo search for a deal that paid Yahoo
$1 billion
versus the 44 that two years earlier
Microsoft was willing to pay for the
whole company. And then Yahoo would sell
itself to Verizon for
>> like three I think something like that.
>> Something like that. Yeah. Single digit
billions.
>> Yes. So Google though knew this day was
going to come eventually. And
fortunately by this time in 2008 Google
had its competitive response all ready
ready to go which was Chrome.
>> And they had actually been working on
improving the state of browsers for
years.
>> Oh yes they had. The story of Chrome
goes all the way back to 2001. Larry and
Sergey wanted to build a web browser in
2001 for this very reason that we've
been talking about the whole episode.
All of Google rested on
>> I didn't realize that
>> Internet Explorer and also I mean it was
Larry and Sergey. Of course they wanted
to build a web browser. It's the most
Google thing. Why wouldn't we build our
own web browser,
>> right?
>> But it was Eric who said in 2001, "No,
we can't do this now. We can't poke the
bear right now. Like Google is too
young, too vulnerable.
>> Calls like this are why Larry and Sergey
brought in Eric.
>> Eric. Yes. The actual quote from Eric at
the time this is in in the Plex is, I
don't want to moon the giant
in 2001.
>> It's a very Eric Schmidt quote.
>> But that doesn't mean that Google isn't
preparing for this. Instead, what they
do is they decide that they are going to
become the primary major benefactor for
the new Mosilla Foundation and what
would become Firefox. Mosilla was the
nonprofit organization that was founded
and spun off from Netscape when AOL
bought Netscape.
>> Are they a funer? Are they actually just
like giving money? Well, I think at
first it probably was like with grants
like giving money because this is
strategically important for Google. But
then once Firefox actually gets released
by Mozilla and deployed out there, the
way Google starts supporting Mozilla and
Firefox is through paying traffic
acquisition costs to them to be the
default search in the Firefox browser.
Spoiler alert, like they do to Apple for
Safari today to the tune of like$20
billion dollars a year.
>> Yes,
>> Firefox is where this all starts with
Mozilla. Actually, traffic acquisition
costs originated before Mozilla because
it's effectively the same thing that
they were doing with software vendors to
include Google Toolbar,
>> right?
>> And so I think the mechanism of payment
over time shifted to more of a rev
share. My understanding now is that they
share some of the revenue they generate
from queries that originate
>> searches that happen in the browser.
>> Exactly. Which is why it ends up being
kind of variable yeartoear. But yes,
Google has a long history of paying for
distribution of their search engine and
the new form that it is now taking is
the Mozilla Firefox browser.
>> Yep. Starting with toolbar. So, this
goes on for a couple years.
>> And by the way, I should say Google
becomes a giant contributor of source
code to Firefox.
>> Well,
>> oh, is that where you're going?
>> I'm going to get into this. So, couple
years, Google's paying Mozilla for
default search in Firefox, basically
funding Mozilla. After a little while,
Google decides that they're gonna hire
some of the key Firefox engineers at
Mozilla to come and work at Google
directly. But they position this as like
essentially this is the same thing. We
are still funding Mozilla and Firefox
just like you know you're Mozilla. You
can't give these employees, these
engineers stock options like you're a
nonprofit. How about instead they do the
same thing that they're doing which is
working on Firefox. They'll just come
and work here at Google and we'll pay
their salaries and they'll get Google
stock options. Otherwise, they're going
to get poached, you know, by all these
tech companies, etc., etc.
>> Fascinating.
>> You can see how this makes sense. This
team that comes over from Mozilla into
Google becomes the core of a new quote
product client group within Google.
Meaning of this being products on
clients, i.e. installed applications on
PCs, not the web apps that the rest of
new Google is doing.
>> And the leader of this group, Google
hires from McKenzie in 2004,
Sundar Fai.
>> Oh, I did not realize that that's where
Sundar came from.
>> Yep. Well, again, all of this is very
strategic because if you did someday
want to build your own web browser,
>> now you've got the bench of talent.
They're employees.
>> So, there's a quote from Mer Schmidt in
in the Plex. This was very clever on
Larry and Sergey's part because of
course these people doing Firefox are
perfectly capable of going and doing
another great web browser.
So this group is sitting there within
Google for a couple years almost like a
latent sleeper cell within Google.
They're just ready to activate as soon
as the Microsoft threat becomes real.
>> And the way I heard it was a lot of
people are working on Google Gears,
which is this browser extension that
allows for offline functionality.
They've built the Google web toolkit to
make web application development even
more advanced, even more sophisticated.
And at some point they kind of lost
faith that Firefox was going to keep the
pace and that Firefox was going to stay
as high quality of a browser as they
needed it. And of course they had some
divergent technical ideas like different
architecture ideas for how a browser
should function that we'll talk about. I
think all of these things are true.
However,
having your own browser when Microsoft
does launch Bing hugely, hugely hugely
important. Imagine if 90% of Google
happened on Internet Explorer and all of
a sudden Microsoft launches Bing,
>> right? There's no amount of money
suddenly that you could pay Microsoft
where they would keep you as the default
search engine because they just want all
the traffic to go to Bing because they
now have a great way to monetize.
>> Absolutely not. Bing default search
engine done, right?
>> And the thing that of course Microsoft
would fail to realize with Bing is you
can't be second place in search,
>> right?
>> The most liquid auction will always win
and Google has already run away with the
search ads auction liquidity and so
traffic on Google searches will forever
be worth more than traffic on the second
place browser.
>> Sure. doesn't mean that that battle
wouldn't be hugely damaging to Google if
they didn't have their own web browser.
So 2006 they finally decide okay it's
time to start work on Chrome.
>> Yep.
>> And also it's clear web apps,
JavaScript,
Ajax very important thing and Internet
Explorer isn't keeping up with the
technology.
>> Yeah. So, there's two killer features,
arguably maybe three, that they're going
to bake into the Google browser.
>> Oh, I've got six.
>> Oh.
>> So, I'm curious which ones you don't
think are important.
>> Okay, I'll go through my three and then
I'll see what else you have to add.
>> Okay, great.
>> Number one, most important, it is going
to have a super fast, super modern,
super performant JavaScript virtual
machine called V8.
>> Yep. that is going to run big web apps
fast and stably.
>> We're the Ajax company, baby. We got to
speed up.
>> We are the Ajax company.
That's right. Two, web apps crashed a
lot back in the day. They don't so much
anymore, but they used to crash a lot.
>> And Larry has this quote when they're
deciding that they should roll out
Chrome, and he kind of explains, "We
have found the web-based service
delivery model to have significant
advantages." You don't say.
But it also comes with its own set of
challenges primarily related to web
browsers which can be slow, unreliable
and unable to function offline.
>> There you go. And so before Chrome, this
is impossible to remember now. But if
you had a tab or a window open and
running a web app and that web app
crashed, it took down your whole
browser.
>> Yep.
>> Everything that you had open gone.
>> Tabs were not their own processes.
>> Nope. So each tab is going to be a
separate process on your machine. So if
the web app running in one tab crashes,
all it takes down is that one tab. And
it made sense that before this they
weren't their own process because one,
tabs were kind of a new thing. But two,
web applications were websites. The
notion of web applications was only
really fourish years old.
>> So those are my big two. I suspect one
of yours is WebKit. I'm not including
WebKit here because that was an Apple
innovation. Yeah,
>> that they borrowed. I'll let you talk
about that in a sec.
>> I don't have anything more to say on
that. It was the best rendering engine.
>> Yes. So, let's say that's three. And
then my sort of three and a half is the
design. So, of course, the web browser
ultimately comes to be called Chrome,
which is ironic. Chrome is a reference
to all the stuff in a web browser, the
toolbarss, the navbar, etc. that take up
space around the content. The idea with
Chrome is and the Google web browser is
going to be minimal Chrome as little as
possible. It's just about the content.
Let the web and the web apps shine.
>> Yes. Okay. When you said UI, I thought
you were going to say this. My fifth is
the omni box.
>> Ah, yes.
>> Originally, there was just the URL bar
and then when search became the killer
app of the web, there's a second little
input box that is for search on the
right side. So, we had that awkward
teenage years where browsers had the URL
bar on the left and then the search on
the right. And it's kind of clean to
think about it on its own because now
that we understand that that is
sponsored that I think for the longest
time that was not in the public psyche
that whatever search engine appeared in
that box in the righth hand corner was
paying for that placement. That was sort
of nice because you type in the URL bar
and that's your organic typing. And then
the other one is your uh I'm willing to
give a kickback to Google probably, but
it could also be Bing, could be Yahoo,
could be whoever. Google
correctly from a user experience
perspective, but also just think about
their core business model is like the
right design for web browsers is that if
you don't type in a URL, it should just
search
>> just one bar. Why have two bars? We
imagine that generating a whole bunch
more page views on search results pages
and a whole bunch more opportunities for
our advertisers to reach your eyeballs.
But I will say they were also correct
from a user experience perspective. The
fact that URLs
ever leaked to the public is a mistake
that is letting an implementation detail
of the technology.
>> It's an accident of history that
consumers type
>> https
slash. Are you kidding me? Consumers
never should have known the phrase HTTP.
>> They should just type New York Times.
>> Yes. Which AOL tried to do. AOL
keywords.
>> Yeah.
>> So, this is effectively leaning into
that idea. You can use this box for
typing in URLs, but like really what you
use this box for is kicking off the
Google search. So, brilliantly aligned
with our business model.
>> All right. So, that's what I got. What
else do you have that's not on my list?
>> That's five. And then lastly,
sandboxing. Each tab is a sandboxed
environment. This prevented a ton of
malware. This was like a big
breakthrough in computer security where
anything that was operating in that tab
was in its own sandbox and couldn't be
accessed maliciously.
>> Yeah, that's I guess gosh remembering
back I mean before Chrome and modern web
browsers
browsing the web was like a security
threat to your PC, right?
>> Yep, that's exactly right.
>> Great point. Okay, so they start work
officially on this in 2006.
They launch it in early September 2008,
like a week before Lehman goes down.
This is wild.
>> I remember that because I remember
sitting in North Carolina at my Cisco
office and I remember reading the Chrome
comic, which I actually just read a
couple nights ago for this episode. This
like amazing web comic
>> at the same desk where I read the news
about the great financial crisis and the
world falling apart and Leman Brothers
collapsing.
>> Wow. So they launch it early September
2008 with the way this is so Google. The
way they decide to launch it is they
hire the famous comic artist Scott Mloud
to illustrate a digital comic book as
like a introduction to Chrome explaining
what it is and like a user manual in a
comic book form. And it's written for
this weird halfuser who's like kind of
technical, but you don't need to be a
programmer necessarily. It's written
sort of for the tech enthusiast who can
understand process independence,
understand sandboxing, understand V8 and
the JavaScript speed up, but it's not
written for the general public.
>> Yep. But that was exactly the right seed
crystal user base to get Chrome
>> Yeah.
>> into.
>> Yeah. It's written for the slash dot
reader. The kind of people who are going
to go home for Thanksgiving in a couple
months and install it on all their famil
family's computers and say you need to
stop using Internet Explorer right now
for all of these reasons, Ben, that you
just listed. Probably security being
number one amongst them. This is
actually was me back in the day. Like
I'm going to go home. I'm going to
install Chrome on my parents' computers
so that they don't get hacked and lose
their financial information, etc.
>> Yep. Within 18 months, they got 40
million users. Then let's see they
launched it in 2008. By 2010 they had 70
million users. Then 2012 they had 200
million users. Actually what happened is
it destroyed Firefox's market share. I
think the launch of Chrome and the peak
of Firefox are right around the same
time. And then after that then it really
started eating away at Internet
Explorer's market share. And today aside
from mostly iPhones but Apple devices
running Safari it is the browser. I mean
to say it worked is like the
understatement of the century. I mean it
totally liberates Google from Internet
Explorer and Microsoft. When Chrome
launched in 2008, Internet Explorer had
almost 70% market share of browsers and
Firefox had most of the rest. 2 years
later, like you said, Chrome had passed
100 million users. By 2012, so four
years after launch, Chrome and Internet
Explorer are now tied for market share
with about 30% each. So, Internet
Explorer has gone from 70% down to 30%.
And this is both Chrome on the desktop
side, but you're now also well into the
rise of mobile. And so, Apple's mobile
Safari is now becoming huge. And
Google's Android that we're going to
talk about in a sec is becoming huge.
Two years after that, in 2014,
Chrome is now the clear leader with 40%
market share. Internet Explorer is down
to 15%.
So,
>> it's over.
>> It's over. And Internet Explorer is
basically dead at this point. And today,
it truly is dead.
>> 2013, 14.
>> Yeah, 2013, 14. Today, it's not even
close. Chrome has almost 70% market
share according to Cloudflare
>> including iPhones which all run Safari
default
>> right Safari in aggregate across mobile
and desktop of mobile is by far the
biggest share of Safari market share is
about 20%. So Chrome has 70%. Safari has
20%. There's 10% left. You know I think
Microsoft I don't know has a couple
singledigit percentage points. Talk
about flipping the tables. Chrome was
massive.
>> And it was just better. It was so much
better. And it really kicked off this
amazing era for the web between Apple
needing to then sort of play catchup and
leaprog. In a lot of years, it was
actually faster than Chrome and they
would go back and forth. And it really
spurred Apple, who was already a steward
of WebKit. And they sort of had their
own competitive response to Microsoft
after Steve Jobs hated the fact that he
had to keep shipping IE as his best
option on Mac
>> cuz that was part of the Microsoft Apple
deal, right? When Microsoft saved Apple
with the investment was Internet
Explorer will become default, right,
>> on the Mac.
>> So Safari was created for that. But over
the years, you know, Apple's incentives,
especially post iPhone, were not to make
it so web apps could be great. Apple's
incentives were to make it so native
mobile and desktop applications could be
great. And so Google really pushing the
envelope in the web's capabilities and
what a modern browser could do forced
this like good for the world race
between Apple and Google to both make
better browsers. I don't think it is an
exaggeration to say that Chrome kept the
web alive.
>> Yeah.
>> As a viable platform for applications.
>> Yep. I mean, Microsoft certainly didn't
have an incentive to do it in the
business model they were in at the time.
And Apple doesn't.
>> They had every incentive not to,
>> right?
>> I mean, who in the world least wants the
web to be a viable application platform?
Microsoft,
>> right? At that point in time, Apple now,
ironically. So there's one more amazing
delicious part of the Chrome story which
is do you remember the Google Chrome
frame? Google Chrome frame was a plugin
for Internet Explorer that replaced
IE's JavaScript engine.
>> Oh wow. and pulled in the Chrome V8
JavaScript engine and I think also
WebKit
>> for land.
>> And so for all the corporate users
>> who couldn't install a new app
>> of America and the world who were stuck
with Internet Explorer, this is the only
reason that IE hung on to market share
for so long was just
>> right lockown PCs. For all those poor
souls, Google was there for you with the
Google Chrome frame plugin that let you
run Chrome quality web apps within
Internet Explorer. Amazing.
>> All right, so I have a question for you
on Chrome before we finish the story.
Why make Chromium open source? The
answer that I've read to that is
mostly about the Google culture and
trying not to be like too evil about it.
>> Yeah, I would buy that.
>> Yeah,
>> they're like an open-source company.
Like it's in their bones to contribute
to open source. There's a thin business
reason I can think of of why they would
want to make it open source. Well, the
reason I can think of is like it doesn't
need to be closed source. They make
their money from searches,
>> right? That's the like it can't hurt.
Here's the way it could help. At first,
I was thinking, well, wait, Google wants
to own as many of the browsers that its
searches originate from as they can, so
they don't have to pay out distribution
costs in the form of traffic
acquisition. So if someone takes
Chromium and then builds a better
browser, it's kind of bad because now
you have to pay that browser maker. But
in practice, as long as it's not
Microsoft and as long as it's more
fragmented, that's probably a trade
they're perfectly happy with. If they
need to go and split some revshare and
pay, you know, someone who makes uh some
variant of Chrome based on Chromium, and
that gets really big and it gets 30% of
the market, great. Google's deated
because they it's not Microsoft. I mean,
look, except for traffic acquisition
cost, Google's incremental gross margin
on search revenue is like 98% or
something like that, they're still going
to be an 87% gross margin business.
>> Cuz the whole point of this was to
prevent a existential risk. And so if
they have to do some light rev sharing,
even in their worst case scenario where
someone builds a successful thing based
on their open source project,
>> oh, so horrible. We go down to 87% gross
margin.
>> Right. Right. It's still perfectly
acceptable, which actually may be the
way it plays out if any of these new AI
browsers work out.
>> Yeah,
>> maybe.
>> Well, not sure any of these AI browsers
would be willing to let Google to pay
them to be the default.
>> Big chess game to consider there.
>> Yes, that is the one catch is the owner
of the browser still has to be willing
to accept the payment from Google. Yes.
I have one analogy for all of this that
is a little far a field, but I think is
actually the right way to think about
this.
>> Okay. Lay it on me.
>> Walt Disney creates Disneyland. Goes
great. Uh very handcrafted, curated,
aurorriven thing, but ultimately he has
to play within the rules of things like
city government.
>> Okay. they go big and get a huge plot of
land in Florida to build Walt Disney
World. It would be nice if we controlled
our underlying foundation a little bit
more. So they build their own government
district around the park,
>> right?
>> And they say we make the rules here.
>> It's not totally dissimilar.
>> Yep. I've been reflecting a little bit
on like why basically from 1998 onward
Google's biggest threat was Microsoft
and not because of Bing, not because of
building advertising, because of this
kind of destabilizing thing. There's
sort of a fine point on it which is that
spiritually Microsoft was the platform
of the PC era. And with this platform
shift, it would be like very convenient
to just be like, oh, Google's the
platform of the web era. But even though
Google is the platform company of the
web era, they aren't necessarily the
ones building the platform,
>> right? Yeah. Yeah. They still existed at
Microsoft's pleasure.
>> And no one owns the web as a platform.
So there's this kind of funky thing
where like Microsoft built and owned
Windows and then dominated the PC era
because of that. Google operates a
search engine that generates advertising
revenue. They don't charge anyone for
anything. They benefit from the web's
growth. And so they're doing this like
strange indirection.
>> Yeah. It's an ecosystem building
exercise.
>> Exactly. They're trying to build the
ecosystem. They're trying to be the
steward of the open web as a platform.
And they like put their finger on the
scale where they need to and take a
little bit more control and ownership
like with Chrome or like with some of
these standards bodies to push the web
forward to make sure that the place
where they live, their neighborhood, the
web, is in good shape. But it's not
their platform in the way that it was
Microsoft's platform in that era.
>> All right. Maybe the Disney World
analogy is uh even better than we gave
it credit for a minute ago.
>> That's sort of I don't know. It's a
little bit loose, but that's what I've
been kicking around.
>> I like it. I like it. Well, no doubt
Chrome was a huge success. Hell, Sundar
becomes the CEO of the company. No
better sign of how successful it was
than that,
>> right? It shored up their future. We
could do a classic acquired what would
have happened otherwise just for a
minute or two here. What if Google
didn't launch Chrome? Let's say Bing
launches in 2009 and there is no Chrome
and Microsoft still has 70% share and
will for a while.
>> Yep.
>> And they make Bing the default. Let's
see. Mobile would get big 3 four years
later in the 2012ish time frame.
>> Yep. Still small. So they basically
would have like four years of 70% of
people using browsers on any devices
being defaulted to Bing.
>> Now obviously a lot of people would
still want Google. They were used to it.
They'd switch back. But like I don't
know, man. Defaults are powerful.
>> Defaults are powerful. I think you're
right.
>> This is why Google pays Apple 20 billion
a year.
>> Yeah. To your point, maybe without
Chrome, Bing would have been a serious
competitor to Google. There is no more
important distribution point for search
than the web browser.
>> It is the way to monetize a browser.
Basically, the single way to monetize a
browser.
>> Yep.
>> Which, let's make this relevant to today
and stop dancing. If the DOJ's ruling is
that Google has to divest Chrome, there
is one way that Chrome is a business and
that is getting paid by Google to drive
traffic to Google as a search engine.
It's the only way to operate a business
of a browser. And like maybe in the AI
era, it's the AI company having it drive
traffic, but it's the same exact thing.
And so, one of two things has to be
true. Google owns Chrome or someone else
owns Chrome and then Google pays them.
But the thing definitely can't make
illegal or I don't really understand
what the goal is if you make it illegal
is if you say they both can't own Chrome
and they can't pay web browsers to drive
traffic. Chrome has no potential of
being a business if that's the case.
>> Yep. So, Chrome, huge win. In fact, it's
so much of a win that after a couple
years, Google starts thinking, well,
gosh, maybe we should build Chrome into
an operating system in and of itself.
Let's go attack Windows. Let's take it
to Microsoft where it really hurts.
Chrome OS, you know, but it became
successful in schools and education.
>> Yeah, Chromebooks. Yeah, Chromebooks
have major market share there, but it's
not a major player in the overall PC
operating system market. It is wild how
much the PC computer operating system
market is still dominated by Windows.
That has never changed. You and I live
in this world where like everybody uses
a Mac. Mac has like 15% market share.
>> Yeah,
>> Windows has like 70% market share of
computer operating systems.
Well, speaking of operating systems,
>> it's time
>> I think it's probably time to talk about
Google's big one.
>> Yes.
>> Which is actually the biggest operating
system in the world.
>> Over three billion active Android
devices now.
>> Totally freaking wild. That they bought
for $50 million.
>> Well, that's a red herring. They've
invested so much more. But just to make
the point, it is hit after hit after
hit. These things are not predicated on
Google's distribution.
If you're a company that launches a new
widget and you can just distribute it
with your old widget, it's not that
impressive when your new widget gets
dominance. But Google Chrome, I mean,
they could do a little thing and they
did push it on Google search pages, but
they managed to get a lot of
distribution just by being a great
product on the market with viral
adoption that everyone told their
friends to use. And it was the David
Rosenthal's going home to Thanksgiving
that were sort of like the seat of it.
And then within three or four years,
they just ran the table. And it's not
just Chrome. Gmail was that way. Google
Docs and spreadsheets were that way. I
mean that way it's everything everything
>> all these things are
>> independent great products that became
dominant on their own merits just like
Google search did.
>> Yes, I 100% agree and also helped by the
fact that they were all free.
>> Yes.
Yes. Fair. And massively subsidized at
least in the early years before they
were able to be businesses on their own
by the uh the old money printing machine
in the basement of Google. Good old
Uncle Edwards.
>> Yes.
>> But before we tell the
>> Before the Android story, now is a great
time to thank one of our favorite
companies, Verscell.
>> Yes, we have talked throughout the
season about Verscell has become the
infrastructure backbone for modern web
and AI development. Highly relevant to
this episode, powering companies like
PayPal, Ramp, Under Armour, Notion,
Runway, Cursor, and many more. Today
though, we want to spotlight V0ero,
which is Verscell's AI app builder that
goes one step further and programs,
designs, iterates, and deploys full
stack web applications entirely for you.
Vzero is a chatbot that looks like
Claude or ChatGpt or Gemini, except that
when you give it a prompt, it will go
build an entire fully functional website
or application entirely for you. No
engineering or web design skills are
required. You don't need to look at a
single line of code or mock up a
wireframe. So a marketer can stand up a
product landing page or a small business
can generate a homepage in a contact
form or a creator can spin up an
independent content hub. Anything.
>> Versel loves to paraphrase the famous
line from Pixar's Ratatouille that quote
everybody can cook which is an
especially fun Easter egg for us since
Pixar was our very first acquired
episode. And the numbers behind Vzero
are wild. It now has 4 million users. So
PMS, marketers, creators, founders,
teachers, students, all building real
productionready applications on this
thing.
>> And speaking of production, every single
VZero app you generate can be deployed
to production instantly with Versell
because Vzero itself entirely runs on
Verscell's platform. So you go from
prompt to full stack deployment with
zero setup using the same secure,
scalable, automatic infrastructure that
powers sites like Ramp, Notion, and
Under Armour. It's the perfect example
of Verscell being customer zero for
their own products. They're using their
own AI cloud to power their own AI
products. So, if you've got an idea that
you want to launch, whether you're a
seasoned developer or someone who's
never written a line of code, go to
versel.com/acquired.
That's verel.com/acquired
and try it out. Build something real and
just tell them that Ben and David sent
you.
>> All right,
Android.
So Google's office spaces
are legendary. The first one of course
being Susan Wajiski's garage in Mountain
View company's first office. And then
today the Google Plex, the old SGI
Silicon Graphics campus in Mountain
View. In between
Google had another office
>> for a couple years in downtown PaloAlto.
at 165 University Avenue would also
later be the office that PayPal was
started in.
>> Oh, really?
>> Very lucky building. Yeah. August 1999
when Google moved out of that office. Do
you know who moved in
>> based on the direction this is going? Is
it danger?
>> Yes, it is.
>> Yes,
>> danger.
the company started by Andy Rubin and
Andy of course had been an engineer at
Apple and then left Apple with a group
of uh rebels I don't know were they
rebels that went to go start General
Magic. General Magic of course legendary
failed startup in Silicon Valley in the
early 90s basically was trying to create
the iPhone just 15 years too early.
>> Yep. after General Magic, after it falls
apart, he starts Danger. Now, Andy's
initial idea for Danger was uh he wanted
to make a wireless version of the QC cat
scanner.
>> What is a QCAT scanner?
>> This was a device that plugged into your
computer that looked like a cat, but it
scanned barcodes. And so Andy's idea
was, okay, well, man, all this general
magic stuff we were trying to do, that
was too far ahead. What if we think
simpler and we just make a wireless
version of this to scan barcodes? Okay,
not a big idea. His first employee at
Danger, a guy named Hiroshi Lockheimer,
convinces him that hey, actually, you
know, a couple years have gone by. Maybe
we should revisit this General Magic
stuff.
>> Wait, Hiroshi was with him at Danger.
>> He was the first employee.
>> I did not know that.
>> Yep. Yes, he was.
>> I mean, he of course is instrumental in
the Android story later. I did not
realize the two of them were at danger
together too.
>> I spoke to Hiroshi in research. He told
me these stories. Great great guy.
Hiroshi led Android and Chrome at Google
for many many years and would be the
authority on this. So Hiroshi's like,
"Hey, hey, I maybe let's revisit this
General Magic stuff." And that led to
Danger building the Sidekick and
launching it in partnership with
T-Mobile. This thing was amazing.
>> That thing was so sick. I was jealous of
all my friends that had one.
>> It was a messaging focused sort of rich
application
cell phone. I think it was along with
Blackberry's
the first vision of a cell phone where
the primary thing you do on it is not
talk to somebody
>> is messaging.
>> These things were freaking awesome. They
were really big with celebrities. I
think it was a plot of an entourage
episode at some point in time.
>> So they end up selling this company to
Microsoft, right?
>> Yes.
Microsoft does end up acquiring the
company but not until 2008 which is the
same year that Android launches. Andy
actually had left Danger in 2003 and
started a new company Android
>> which in the earliest days it was kind
of like an opensource competitor to
effectively Blackberry software.
>> Yes. In its earliest earliest days, the
first version of Android the company,
remember I was talking about point
andoot cameras and digital cameras back
in the YouTube section.
>> Yeah.
>> Was actually to build a cross-platform
open-source operating system for
point-and-oot digital cameras.
>> Oh, wow.
>> Yeah. That was Andy's vision was like,
"Oh, hey, these point- and-oot devices
like hundreds of millions of consumers
have them now. What if there were a
powerful operating system? Could that be
a Trojan horse to get an operating
system? You could sort of imagine it,
>> right? If cameras became phones instead
of phones becoming cameras, then yes.
>> Yep. Exactly. But pretty quickly it does
become clear that phones are going to
become cameras. So, good thing is
though, the software they're writing
still works just as well on phones. So
Andy pivots the company and has the
delivery vector shift from cameras to
smartphones. And at the time the
smartphone market such that it existed
and it did exist.
>> Blackberry, Windows Mobile.
>> Well, yeah. So here were the players.
Basically phone companies either were
full stack like Apple and the iPhone is
today where they made the phone and the
operating system. So that was Nokia. And
then the big player in the smartphone
market at least was Blackberry. Made
their own software, made their own
devices, huge in the enterprise market.
Or you did have OEMs, device makers who
made devices and then they bought an
operating system either from Palm which
made their own devices but then also
started selling the operating system to
other vendors or the big player was
Microsoft with Windows Mobile. And this
was a license model as we talked about
in our Microsoft part two. This was you
pay Microsoft singledigit dollars and
you get an operating system and then you
build the phone stuff on top of the
operating system.
>> Exactly. And this was a good business
for Microsoft. Obviously it wasn't as
big as the desktop market, but you can
totally understand why this is their
strategy. We are the main desktop
operating system provider. This is our
business model there. Let's just do the
same thing here. It seems to be working.
>> Y
>> and as far as the phone manufacturers,
the OEMs and the carriers are concerned,
things are also pretty good. These
phones that they're making, they can't
really do that much. But because of
that, they don't actually cost that much
to make. And the consumers, meanwhile,
are paying through the nose for these
things. cuz you have a smartphone on a
carrier contract, you're paying like a
hundred bucks a month.
>> And they don't consume that much data
either because they're not that capable.
>> Everybody is fat and happy.
>> Yeah.
>> So into this
morass that also Steve Jobs is of course
looking at the same thing and saying
this sucks. Enter Andy and Android. and
he goes around and he starts pitching
the phone manufacturers and the
carriers, hey, stop buying an operating
system from Microsoft or from Palm. I'll
give you a great one for free and oh, by
the way, it's going to be open source
and there'll be third party applications
that can be written to it and these
devices will be super powerful. The
ecosystem's like, no, I don't want this
one.
There's just no way in hell that
>> a startup
>> AT&T or Verizon is going to work with a
little rinky dink startup that's valued
at like $10 million and has eight
employees. There's billions and billions
of dollars at stake here. But the other
part of it too, I think the reason that
the smartphone market had stagnated for
so long was this. Everybody was happy,
>> right? It's a non-priority to upset the
Apple cart,
>> right? It's almost like a version of um
enterprise software in it, right? The
users don't like it, but the users
aren't actually the customers here as
it's the carriers who are the customers.
>> Yep.
>> So 2005 rolls around. Andy's now two
years into the company with Android.
He's managed to convince HTC, the
Taiwanese manufacturer, to make a
prototype with him. He's showing it to
carriers. He's showing it to other OEMs.
But for all the reasons we just
discussed, it's tough sledding out
there. The company's running out of
money. As Andy is going around trying to
jin up investment for another round, he
ends up meeting with Larry Page. Larry
immediately is like, "Forget raising
another round. What if I buy you right
now?" So July 2005, Google buys Android
for $50 million. 50 million dollars per
Android. Oh my goodness.
>> But of course that's a fallacy because
they would pour billions in in
development.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They put
billions. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, I know.
I know. I know. But like to your point,
this episode, Google is the hit factory
here. This is the hit parade,
>> right? The correct way to think about
Android is that Google built it in house
with a little kick in the pants from
this startup kind of got far enough
along with the idea that forced them to
do it now. But they needed the kick in
the pants.
>> Yes. Because why was Larry so excited?
Why did they buy Android right away?
Eric and Larry and Sergey, they all knew
that they were late to mobile. Here we
are. It's now mid 2005. Hm.
>> Were 18 months away from the reveal of
the iPhone. Apple and Google are very
close.
>> Why do you think they knew that they
were late?
>> I'm sure they were starting to get wind
from Apple of what was going on.
>> That's true. Eric's on the board at this
point, right, of Apple.
>> He's not yet on the board, but he's
about to join the board. But the
companies are very close.
>> Okay,
>> there's that. But but even let's say
they don't know about the iPhone.
Blackberry is a thing. Yep.
>> Big adoption.
>> Yep.
>> Smartphones, you know, and even Windows
Mobile, as bad as it was, proved that
there is demand. There's clearly
consumer demand for this,
>> right? They had a version of Google.com
for these devices to access and they
could see the traffic
>> and they really knew it, especially from
maps. Google Maps on mobile devices,
smartphones, was a killer application.
Google is maintaining, I kid you not,
different versions of Google Maps for
mobile for all the just sea of phones
out there. And so like they know
>> we have built our local government
district on the desktop around our
Disney World and uhoh, looks like mobile
needs a district too.
>> Yeah. So sure you like you're right.
they would have done this anyway, but
they were starting to feel already like,
"Oh, shoot. We should have started this
two years ago, buying Android kickstarts
things." And like from the Google
perspective, thank God they did cuz
we're 18 months away from the iPhone
launch. And if they are starting from a
cold start in January 2007, good luck.
We're not telling this story right now.
>> If they don't buy Android and they don't
get started basically in the month that
they did, this market belongs to
Microsoft. Apple.
>> No, Microsoft.
>> Oh, why do you say Microsoft?
>> There's going to be two players in this
market. I see what you're saying.
There's going to be a fully integrated
player, which Apple was going to be, and
then there's going to be an OEM plus
licensed operating system, and the model
would have just been that Microsoft
sells operating systems, a mobile
operating system.
>> Great point.
>> To the OEMs who were freaking out that
Apple was going to run away with it.
>> Great point. So now back to Android and
why Android was especially so
attractive. Andy already had the right
business model for Google. It's just
that as Android the startup OEMs and
carriers are like giving it to me for
free. Like that makes you less
attractive to me. But now all of a
sudden within Google they can run the
playbook that they run everywhere. They
go the carriers the OEMs.
>> It's funny how giving it away for free
as a startup is counter signal. It makes
you look desperate. But if you're Google
it's like oh they must have a really
good plan here.
>> Yeah.
Exactly. So they start work on Android
as part of Google here in summer of
2005. And the plan initially is that
they're going to be two versions of
Android. There is a prototype and a
device that'll be more near-term to
launch called the quote unquote sooner
sort of the more Blackberry like device,
not a touchscreen device. And then there
was a longer term
advanced research project cenamed the
dream for a touchscreen smartphone
device.
>> Summer of 2006, that next year, Eric
Schmidt joins the Apple board.
>> Sees how far along and how good the
iPhone is.
>> Uhhuh. And then January of 2007, the
iPhone is revealed in the greatest
corporate presentation keynote of all
time.
>> Yeah,
>> Eric is in the freaking keynote. Steve
Jobs invites Eric Schmidt on stage.
>> And Android hasn't been announced yet,
right?
>> Nope. Nope. Nobody knows about Android.
>> This is in January of ' 07. And then
July of 07 is when it shipped.
>> July of 07, yes, is when the iPhone
shipped. Now, I believe Eric had
disclosed to Steve about the Sooner
project because obviously it was public
that Google had acquired Android. And I
believe that Steve Jobs knew that Google
was working on like a Blackberry style
phone, but he did not know about the
Dream prototype. So, Eric comes on stage
and you go watch this. We'll link to
this in this clip in the show notes.
It's crazy. It's about a, you know,
three minute long total thing. Eric
comes on stage. He makes a joke about
merging the companies that like Apple
and Google are so close they should
merge. He says the company should be
called Apple Goo. And then he jokes and
he says, "Well, but here's the way with
the iPhone that we can merge the
companies without actually merging."
>> He's making these jokes and the camera
is focused on Steve Jobs and he just has
the ick.
>> I mean, that's the best way to describe.
He's like trying to be a good sport and
smile and be like, "Yeah."
But he has the ick.
>> It is unbelievable to watch this knowing
everything that would happen over the
next 10, 15 years.
>> This incredibly close collaboration.
There are two apps that launch in the
very first version of the iPhone.
Remember, it didn't have an app store.
It was not open to third party
developers. There is a YouTube app and a
maps app. Both of which are Google
services. Now, the apps are written by
Apple. The icons are designed by Apple.
They're basically just consuming
Google's data as APIs. The only icons
and apps on the phone are the ones that
Apple puts there. And two of the Yeah, I
don't know how many there were, 10, 12,
13 apps are Google apps. It's wild. By
the way, the uh the YouTube icon with
the wood green TV. So awesome.
>> So awesome. I heard uh the YouTube team
absolutely detested it.
>> They hated it. Yeah, they hated it.
Well, because it wasn't the YouTube logo
and they they knew already. I mean, it
was obvious this was not going to work
because the YouTube team is like Apple
didn't put our logo on there. Of course,
they're going to start bringing in other
video content over time. It was a little
bit pre-algorithm, but it was the
thinking was there of we have to make
YouTube a destination and then control
the experience when they're in. And
making the app icon reminiscent of an
old school CRT TV was also just like
deeply antithetical to YouTube inventing
the video of tomorrow.
>> Yes. Yes. It still looked great though.
>> It fit in with that first iPhone for
sure.
>> It totally did. Do you know who was the
leader of the Google mobile teams that
developed the backends for these apps?
>> Oh, no.
>> Vic Gondotra.
>> Really?
>> Yes. That was his first job, I think,
within uh within Google. First or second
job within Google. Vic is going to come
back up here in a minute. So, the iPhone
keynote truly worldchanging historic
event. The Android team, of course, is
watching this. And uh yeah, that whole
Sooner prototype thing uh right in the
trash
>> the next day, right in the trash can.
Directly in the trash can. The dream is
no longer a dream. It's happening now.
>> Get in, kid. You're the A team now.
>> Yep. Clearly, touchscreens
are the future of mobile devices
>> and a capacitive touchcreen at that.
Yeah. So, remember Eric Schmid is on the
Apple board. Once Steve Jobs finds out
about what the Android team in Google is
now doing, he goes ballistic.
>> Or perhaps, to use his word,
thermonuclear.
>> Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Fullon classic
Steve Jobs supposedly at an Apple all
hands meeting. This is actually a little
later, but he's overheard and quoted
leaked to the press as saying, "We did
not enter the search business. They
entered the phone business. Make no
mistake, Google wants to kill the
iPhone. We won't let them.
>> Wow.
>> Which is, I mean, to this day, fair.
Apple has been happy to just take a
spiff of all the traffic that they send
to Google and not compete in Google's
core business.
>> Yep.
>> Now, I will say I believe Apple
reputation launderers a little bit. They
get a lot of the value of being in the
search business without having to do all
the uh stuff that they demonize from a
privacy and data sharing and all that
ickiness perspective. But fine,
whatever. It's doing business.
>> That's fair. Apple did not enter the
search business.
>> So, in Walter Isacson's book, Steve Jobs
says, "I'm going to destroy Android
because it's a stolen product. I'm
willing to go thermonuclear war on
this."
>> Yes. He also says, "I will spend my last
dying breath if I need to, and I will
spend every penny of Apple's $40 billion
in the bank to write this wrong."
>> He was pissed.
>> He was really pissed. Now,
interestingly, he doesn't actually kick
Eric Schmidt off the board until 2009.
>> Yeah, it's interesting.
>> So, I think it took Steve a little while
to realize what the dream was within
Google. And there's also a reasonable
argument back. Look, both companies took
stuff from each other. A lot of the
stuff that, you know, Apple touts that
they were the first company to ever do
multi-touch and they own there were
predecessor companies that did
multi-touch before them too. The iPhone
debuted a lot of technologies for the
first time and a lot of them were also
just at the right time in history and I
think Android ar arrived at a lot of
similar conclusions at the same time.
>> True. It's interesting you said
multi-touch. the multi-touch actually
becomes the battleground
>> cuz that's the patent that they go to
war over.
>> That's the patents that Apple has. So
Steve Jobs threatens to sue Google over
implementation of multi-touch gestures.
And so as a result, Android for several
years, doesn't have things like pinch to
zoom or the sort of swipe operating
system UI navigation gestures. And I'm
pretty sure if you remember early
Android phones for the first couple
years, every single one of them had four
physical buttons at the bottom of the
phone to navigate the operating system.
I think this is why.
>> Huh. But let's take the Google side of
this argument for a minute. When Android
does launch, they have the market, which
today is the Play Store. Apple didn't
have an app store. Yep. Android had when
you swipe down a notification center
with all the notifications from each of
your individual apps. You could
>> took Apple years to get that
>> drag to rearrange apps on the home
screen. I mean these are things that
Apple then directly copied as well. So
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> All right. So yeah, let's get into the
>> great artists steal.
>> Exactly. Let's get into the launch and
the competition. So November 2007. So
what's that? 10 months after the iPhone
reveal and five months after the launch,
remember Android launches in 2008,
Google announces the formation of the
Open Handset Alliance.
>> That's right.
>> And this is a partnership with HTC,
Motorola, Samsung, LG, T-Mobile, Sprint,
Qualcomm, Intel, Broadcom, and Texas
Instruments. And this was so confusing
at the time. I and everybody else was
like,
>> "What does it mean?
>> What is this? Is Google making a phone?
is Google not making a phone. So then a
whole year goes by with basically
nothing. Then in September of 2008, a
lot of things happened in September of
2008. Chrome, Android, Lehman Brothers,
Google announces the T-Mobile G1 phone,
the Gphone.
And the T-Mobile G1 is manufactured by
HTC, remember Andy and Android's
original partner in the prototype. And
the product name, the HTC product name
for it is the HTC Dream.
>> Heyo.
>> This is the Dream. This was what they
were working on. And in the US, it's
called the G1. It actually is a super
interesting little device. I wrote an
app in it. I had a class in college. It
was like a capstone class or something
where I could like pick my own project
to do. and we had a fourperson team and
one of the guys had a T-Mobile G1 and we
wrote I think it was like a Java um
thing for it but he then founded the
company Daily Booth after that.
>> Oh wow. Yeah.
>> In fact, it may have even been like a
Daily Booth for Android app.
>> You had a lot of founders come out of
your crew at Ohio State. Awesome. So it
has a touchcreen on the front with the
physical navigation buttons like I was
talking about. It has a slide out
horizontal query keyboard, sort of
reminiscent of the Sidekick back in the
days, unlike the iPhone. It has
multitasking,
so you can run multiple apps at once,
and it has third party applications.
Now, that's a little bit unfair to the
iPhone because by the time the G1
actually launched, Apple had indeed just
shipped the App Store. The event where
they launch it is like T-Mobile event in
New York City in a commercial kitchen.
It's a haphazard random launch. You
can't even find video of it today.
There's like little clips you can find
and still images what is widely reported
and you can actually see in photos.
Larry and Sergey do show up. They
rollerblade into the building. They
rollerblade on stage. There all these
T-Mobile and HTC executives there in
suits. Here come Larry and Sergey on
rollerblades on stage.
>> Listeners, join the acquired email list.
We'll throw this in the next email that
goes out.
>> Yeah, it was halfhazard to say the
least. But the G1/Dream
becomes a pretty decent success. It
sells over a million units in the US and
just this one device, this one phone
gets 6% smartphone market share, which
puts it roughly on par with Palm. Like
all of Palm,
>> the G1 kind of matches in
>> market share, but the smartphone market
is still very small.
>> Yeah. It's important to remember mobile
really wasn't a thing until 2011
of very obviously the next wave and the
next computing paradigm.
>> Yep. But to be fair to Apple and the
iPhone, it is starting to run away with
the market. And this is to the point of
man, if Google had not bought Android
when it had, it would have been too
late. So the whole lifetime of the G1,
they sell about a million units. The
iPhone sold 11 million units in 2008
alone, 20 million in 2009. So basically
overnight, Apple and the iPhone goes
from not in the smartphone market at all
to over 50% market share of smartphones.
But as great as the iPhone was, it did
have a few weaknesses.
>> No copy paste. No copy paste. Yep.
>> No multitasking.
>> As mentioned before, it didn't
multitask. Not very customizable. I
think we're still in the era of you
can't even change your wallpaper on the
iPhone. Pretty sure we are.
>> I think it's still just the black
background.
>> Yep. You can't put your own apps on it
from anywhere but the App Store even
after it launches.
>> Yep. A big knock at the time. People
love that it's a touchscreen. People
really wanted the physical keyboards.
>> Yep. And the biggest problem with the
iPhone, at least in the US, you can only
get it on AT&T.
>> And you could only get it with the Edge
network. It was unusable.
>> That's right. It didn't have 3G.
>> It was so terri I mean, eventually the
iPhone 3G came out within a year, but
even that was really slow. It was the
network had not caught up to what you
wish the device could do for a few
years.
>> Yep.
So, that brings us to holiday 2009
and the Motorola Droid
>> changed everything.
>> It's sort of funny to say now like, oh,
the Motorola like the Motorola droid.
This changed everything. Yes, the Motor
I mean, when we interviewed Steve Balmer
a couple months ago, he brought it up.
When the Droid launched, it was holiday
2009. And I think you and I were like,
"Was it really that late? Wasn't it
early?" And he was like, "Nope,
Christmas 2009. I will never forget it."
That is when Android won the market.
This was the moment
>> and Google was really willing to put
their brand second. Now, were they
really putting their brand second? It's
Android versus Droid. So, very
convenient. But like if you were to go
survey the American public in 2009, 10,
11, 12, maybe even 13 and say, "Do you
know about Android, the mobile operating
system?" "No." "Do you know about
Droid?" "Oh, yeah. I have a Droid
phone." Well, and then there were a
couple years after that where it was
like, "Do you know about Google and
Android?" Yeah, maybe. Do you know about
Samsung and Galaxy? Oh, yeah. I know
about that.
>> Yep. Exactly.
>> So, we'll get into that in a sec. The
Droid
>> Droid does, baby.
>> Verizon at this point is getting
pummeled by AT&T. It's been two years
since the iPhone launch. AT&T isn't just
stealing a lot of subscribers from
Verizon because of the iPhone. They're
stealing the best subscribers, the
people that are willing to pay the most
money for the biggest data plans for
smartphones. Verizon finally decides
like, we got to change the game here. We
got to be able to compete with the
iPhone. We're going to go all in on
Android. We are going to buy a device
and make this our flagship smartphone,
position it against the iPhone, and we
are going to invest hugely behind this
thing. So, the device itself, the actual
Droid made by Motorola, it was a great
device. It had a big screen, big screen
for the time, a slide out keyboard, it
had a 5 megapixel camera, removable
battery, all of these things the iPhone
didn't have. Probably the most important
feature it had though, the killer killer
app was on the software side. It was the
first Android device launched with
Google Maps turnbyturn
>> navigation. I didn't realize that.
>> So before the Droid, there was this
whole consumer electronics product
category of dedicated GPS devices.
People old enough to remember my
remember this. TomToms, Navex, people
would buyarm
>> these devices. Garmin. Yep.
>> They would put them in their cars and
you also paid a monthly subscription fee
for the service of the turnbyturn
navigation. Overnight, this entire
product category gets obsoleted,
sherlocked, gone, because Google Maps is
a better product with better navigation
and it's free. No more monthly fees,
just baked in in your phone, in the
device you already have with you. Why on
earth would anybody buy, let alone pay
monthly, for a standalone GPS product
again?
>> Yep.
>> And you know what doesn't have it? the
iPhone, the Apple version of Google
Maps, you had to manually advance the
steps. So, it would pull up the route
and then you could tap the button to be
like, I've made this turn. Now, show me
the next step.
>> That's right.
>> Part of it.
>> That's such a funny You're exactly
right. I remember that, too.
>> Not really what you want to do while
you're driving,
>> man.
>> Yeah. It's crazy how not that long ago
this was.
>> Totally.
>> That was the killer feature. But even
more important than all the features was
the marketing and the muscle that
Verizon put behind this. So they
licensed the droid name from Lucasfilm.
>> That's right. And I think Lucasfilm was
mentioned at the bottom in the credits
of every commercial.
>> Yes, every commercial. And they did
these series of commercials that we've
been referencing. Man, if you lived in
the US and you are older than like 12 at
this time, this is burned in your
memory. It was so great. The first 80%
of the ad, 90% of the ad was a Apple
style ad knockoff with the like bright,
happy, upbeat music and the white
background and it had the fading Apple
style text and it said, "I don't
multitask.
I don't have a removable battery, you
know, etc., etc." And then the very
last, you know, 5 seconds of the ad,
there was like a hard cut and like
static noise and it was black and it was
edgy and then it said Droid does
It was so good. So, the CMO of Verizon,
so Verizon did all of this, said that
the campaign was designed to quote,
"Wake up the market."
And boy did it ever. So, that original
Droid, I think it sold a quarter million
units the first weekend it was on sale,
and then it sold a million units faster
than the original iPhone had. Like there
was just so much pent-up demand for a
real smartphone on the Verizon network
>> plus all the you know yeah this has
turnbyturn navigation but even like put
aside whether it was better or not it
just was a real smartphone on Verizon.
Time magazine named the Droid its
product of the year for 2009.
>> Wow.
>> The bigger thing though is that like
Verizon going all in behind it even
though they would add the iPhone later.
It creates sort of this seed of what the
Android user base would become today, at
least in America, because Verizon went
all in on Android, all in on Droid. Over
the next couple years, they followed the
original Droid up with, let's see, there
was the HTC Droid Incredible, the Droid
X, the Droid 2, the Droid Bionic, the
Droid Max. All of these had major
marketing campaigns behind it. game over
for the the segment of the market that
is not Apple, this different OEM from
operating system. Google just runs away
with it. And before this, Microsoft had
a shot.
>> They really did.
>> They were a systemic disadvantage
because they were going to carriers and
saying, "Why don't you pay us five
bucks, 10 bucks?" And Google was going
to them and saying, "Here you go. This
is free. You can have the source code
and you can modify it as you see fit."
Even today, the I think um Samsung has
their own OS, Samsung one or something
like that that looks different. I mean,
it's Android, but it's the open-source
version of Android that they've
customized. That's the thing that's on,
I don't know, a billion phones. And
three, we aren't Microsoft.
>> Yeah, you guys don't want to be compact,
>> right? Microsoft managed to suck up all
the profit in that entire value chain.
And handset makers, you currently make
money. So, why would you go work with
Microsoft who did that to the PC makers?
And then as a little sweetener on top of
all this, you know how I mentioned it
was free in open source?
>> It's actually less than free.
>> We're actually gonna pay you.
>> Yeah.
>> For searches that originate on your
phone, we will give a little revshare to
both the carrier and the OEM, the
handset maker.
>> Yep. So this was not widely publicized
at the time as you can imagine but uh
Bill Gurley wrote a blog post where he
had heard from friends that Google was
paying carriers and OEMs to use Android
even though Android was free. And he
wrote this incredible blog post about it
called the less than free business
model. And he basically predicted that
like Android's going to run away with
this year. If you're a carrier or an
OEM, sure, there's a segment of the
market that's going to demand Apple.
That's fine. But Microsoft is dead. Palm
is dead. Blackberry is dead. There's no
way you can compete with free, let alone
less than free, where they are paying
you to take something of value for free.
>> Yep.
>> And from Google side, it's the exact
same thing as that thing we talked about
with open sourcing Chromium. They're
happy to give a few percentage points in
traffic acquisition costs of their
search revenue to people who are
ensuring that the platform underneath
them doesn't belong to someone else. I
mean, there were some risks that it was
all Apple and then that creates two
problems for Google. One, they pay Apple
a lot more money than they pay the
combination of the carrier and the OEM
maker. Those get a much smaller spiff.
Two, this means that Google controls
more of the underlying environment that
they operate in. Imagine how terrible it
would be for them if mobile Safari was
the new Internet Explorer and their
entire franchise was at risk of Apple
saying, "And we're going to point
traffic over here." Now, Google is happy
to toss a couple of points over to these
guys. I can't think of another example
of a dominant technology business and
business model that has successfully
survived and transitioned a major
platform shift. Yes.
>> And thrived in that next platform as
well.
>> Mobile was a platform shift. A huge one.
I mean going from PC to the web was a
platform shift. Going from PCM web to
mobile was an even bigger platform
shift.
>> Play it out even back further in history
than this. IBM was dominant in
mainframes and then lost their dominance
in the PC era. Microsoft was dominant in
PCs and then lost their dominance in the
web era. Google was dominant on the web
and stayed dominant in the mobile era. I
mean, they didn't derive giant profits
from the mobile like directly off of
selling phones or selling the OS or, you
know, they make some money on the Play
Store, but not giant amounts relative to
the rest of their money and what other
players like Apple make,
>> but they kept search going,
>> but they managed to stay relevant to
consumers with these, you know, hundreds
of millions, billions of devices that
they shipped and their business was
doing better than ever. I mean, all of
these Android phones that are shipping,
especially in the earlier years, what is
the most prominent part of the UI on the
touch screen? Giant freaking Google
search bar right there at the top,
>> right? The state of play of being a big
tech company, and this dates back 80
years, is technology moves fast and the
new paradigms disrupt everyone that came
before you. So you get one era and you
got to make the absolute most of the one
era that you grew up in and after that
you're probably going to lose relevance.
You might keep your money machine going
for a long time. Famously IBM made more
revenue than Microsoft for a lot longer
than people think.
>> Or even take Microsoft and Windows. Like
Windows is still big today.
>> Yep. But the importance of that platform
is going to fade and fade and fade.
>> But yeah, you won't be able to
transition your business model into the
next era. Google did it
>> and occasionally someone you know misses
the second era but comes back for the
third like Apple figured out mobile.
They never won a previous era. They were
a player in PCs but they didn't win.
Almost no one gets two and almost no one
gets two successive ones. And that is
the really impressive thing that Google
figured out how to do here.
>> Yeah. I mean guys like we said this
episode is the hit parade. Android
basically from end of 2009 onward just
washes over the world like a title wave.
In holiday 2009 when the Droid comes
out, total Android market share of the
smartphone market is still in the, you
know, the G1 range, like five 6% global
market share. One year later, 30%.
>> Wow.
>> They go from 5% to 30% in one year. They
announced that over 200,000 Android
devices are shipping every day around
the world. The next year in 2011,
Android's market share is 50%. And two
years after that, by the end of 2013, it
is 80%
market share. In many ways, it's sort of
the Visa network of networks thing where
they don't have to make every phone.
They don't have just one horse in the
race. They're getting leverage by having
two, three, four, five major
manufacturers of these devices that are
all independently doing their own
marketing. And there's a very clever
arrangement where you can just have the
Android open source project and you can
build your own mobile phone and you know
you can launch it and you don't have our
app store and you don't have to default
to Google search and you don't get
Google map. Like you just have the
operating system and it's great. Anyone
can do that. But why wouldn't you want
to have our app store? It's where the
all all the apps are. And if you do
that, then you get all the great Google
services, all the apps. You you get the
native Gmail and the native maps and all
this great stuff we've written. And if
you do that, then Google's the default
search and we'll pay you for that
>> and then you make money.
>> Yeah.
>> But by the way, if you want all this
stuff that your consumers are going to
demand, you are going to default to
Google search. Like it's a very uh
>> that's the payment. Yeah, that's the
that's the offer you can't refuse.
>> Yes.
>> Now, here's the actual sort of crazy
thing. As I said, by 2013, Android
global market share is 80%. That's
actually higher than it is today. Today,
it's down to like, I think, 72%.
And Apple is, you know, 27.99%.
Apple's share has really grown. No
question, Android pushed iPhone to be
better on many dimensions. Things like
cheaper iPhones, bigger screens, better
cameras. I mean, on and on and on and on
of things that I don't think Apple would
have done if Android hadn't been pushing
them.
>> Probably not big cheap screens, but some
of the cameras, I think. So,
>> maybe. I don't know. I mean, for years,
the iPhones did not have good cameras.
Uh big part of that Droid marketing push
was the five megapixel camera.
>> That's right.
>> The original few iPhones had a 2
megapixel camera, I think. Like it was
crappy.
>> Yeah, they've definitely pushed each
other.
>> Yep. So then the other quick thing to
mention on Android, there was one
interesting moment and tension with
Samsung in the early to mid2010s.
Samsung basically said, "Oh, okay. The
iPhone is the premium device. Android is
this incredibly flexible platform. What
if we just take Android and copy the
iPhone with Android?
And they got really good at it. The
Galaxy devices were just shipping in
huge, huge numbers. And then Samsung
started stripping out Google services
and putting their own Samsung services
>> in on some of their devices.
>> That was a bridge too far for Google. So
this is when Google started the Pixel
program. Google had done the Nexus
program making their own hardware
before. The Pixel though was and is a
sort of reference device that yeah,
consumers could buy, but more so to show
the rest of the OEM market, the non
Samsung market, hey, here are reference
designs essentially for great premium
devices, great cameras, all the features
you want. Here, copy these. It's the
same thing as the Microsoft Surface
strategy. why Bomber was so adamant. We
got to make a service. We got to show
the OEMs how to do this,
>> right? It's funny. So, I have been
trying to think about what is the
business of Android. Google having
Android versus Google not having
Android. And I tried to pull up the most
credible numbers I possibly could.
There's basically
two
things that you just have to add
together to create the value. One is how
much money they make from the Play
Store, which has become significant.
didn't used to be but is now. And then
the second is how much money are they
saving by not having the searches
originate from a platform that they
don't own. I used to think, oh, because
it's Android, they don't have to pay
money. They have to pay $20 billion to
Apple. It's not zero. They do actually
have to pay, like we talked about, Dave
and I sort of figured out as we were
going through the financial disclosures
and stuff, they do pay the OEMs and they
do pay the carriers. And the question is
how much? Cuz once you can kind of
figure out how much, then you can do a
little bit of napkin math to figure out,
okay, well, how much are they still
saving by it not being Apple? So Google
paid out last year, and I'm just using
the current numbers to try to figure out
what the splits have always been. They
paid out last year 55 billion in total
traffic acquisition costs. Now, traffic
acquisition costs are actually the sum
of two different numbers from two
different businesses because they love
to offiscate things. one, it's what
we're actually looking for, the
acquisition of traffic to Google search.
And the other component is money that we
paid to publishers where our ads show up
in the sort of doubleclick AdSense
world.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, we know that that averages about a
7030 split and we know that they made
$30 billion last year gross in the
Google network. So you could say, okay,
they probably paid out about $21 billion
of that 55 billion in the AdSense
doubleclick Google network world. So
that backs our 55 billion down to 34
billion. Okay, that's 34 billion in
actual traffic acquisition for Google
search.
>> And we know 20 was iPhone,
>> right, for Safari searches. So that
means there's 14 billion that gets
distributed to non-Apple
traffic acquisition distribution
partners which in their annual report
they define as browser providers, mobile
carriers, original equipment
manufacturers and software developers.
It's basically 14 billion to the the
Android mobile carriers and OEMs plus
Firefox.
>> Yep.
>> What am I missing? I'm going to guess
Firefox is less than a billion. Call it
somewhere around half a billionish.
>> Yeah, there's probably
some version of the old portal deals
that still exist.
>> Properties on the web that have Google
search baked into it.
>> Okay. So, let's cut 4 billion off for
Firefox and the other web properties and
other
>> Yep. Okay. So, 10 billion going to the
carriers and OEMs. It's actually pretty
significant that 10 billion going to
carriers and OEMs. It's half of what
they're paying Apple.
>> Half of what they're paying Apple, but
for many, many, many more devices,
>> right? And so clearly the rev share to
the carriers and OEMs is a much smaller
percent than what they have to pay
Apple. I'd guess a quarter. Either way,
I actually think after walking all the
way through it, the bigger component of
this is just derisking their future.
It's not how many billions. They don't
care about giving 10 billion up for
this.
>> Yeah. As we've been saying all episode,
Google is more than happy to pay traffic
acquisition costs to any and everyone.
>> Yes. And so then direct value that they
make from the Play Store, it actually
came out in a lawsuit. In 2019, Play
Store revenue was 11.2 billion. Then
gross profit was 8.5 billion and 7
billion in operating income. Now, 7
billion, not nothing, but still a far
cry from Google's core business of ads
from search, Gmail, and maps. And that
same year, the core business did almost
a hundred billion in revenue. So,
something like 85 billion in gross
profit is my best estimate, and around
30ish billion in operating income. So,
even though the Play Store made 7
billion in 2019, the important thing is
that Android is still primarily
protecting the core search ads business
and making sure that traffic doesn't go
elsewhere. This levered Google's web
business into the mobile era. How
amazing is that?
>> Yeah, that's true. It probably generated
several hundred billion dollars profit
dollars that they may not have had those
years otherwise.
>> Yeah. So I guess what I'm saying is
obviously Android was a giant success
and the biggest reason even though they
save I don't know 10 15 billion a year
from not having to pay it to Apple and
even though they generate 8 billion I'm
sure at this point it's bigger I don't
know 10 15 billion a year really it's
about just protecting the core not about
saving costs.
>> Yeah. And this one they almost missed
it. They hadn't bought Android when they
had like that window was closing fast
>> and Microsoft did miss it
>> fast fast fast. Yep.
>> And so at some point Andy Rubin leaves
and Sundar actually takes over the
combined teams. So our hero here who is
starting to gather more
responsibilities. It was just the
application clients and then it was
Chrome and in 2013 it becomes Chrome and
Android. And whenever you see Sundar on
stage, he is very proud of Google's two
open platforms.
>> Yep.
>> So today there are more than 3 billion
active Android devices. I think it's
even higher than that now.
>> This just silly. There's like 7 billion
people in the world. They're
>> over three billion active Android
phones.
>> Yes. So you're probably thinking coming
into this 2010 2011 era, they're really
feeling themselves over there at Google.
You know, we've jumped over some
failures, but it's been hit after hit
after hit in a lot of these areas that
really matter. Just like we talked about
on the Microsoft episodes, it really
doesn't matter when you fail and how
many times you fail, even the size of
your failures, if your hits are these
giant worldchanging
platform type tech businesses that
endure for decades. And that's what they
had on their hands.
>> Yep. And it sure looked at this time
like there was another big technology
category out there
>> of social
>> that Google should be playing in of a
similar size called
social.
>> Yes.
>> And this is the plus story. I'd say rest
in peace, but I don't think anybody
misses it.
>> Yeah. All right. Well, I want to start
this story the way that people expect us
to start the story. And I have a little
bit of a different take on it as we get
partway in.
>> Great.
>> So, Google had been interested in social
for a long time. They weren't blind
blind to it. In 2007, they tried to do
open social and they basically failed at
that because Facebook didn't participate
and Facebook was social. So, everything
else combined didn't really matter.
>> Oh, you didn't start where I thought you
were going to start. The craziest thing
is that Google had Facebook before
Facebook. Orchid.
>> Yeah, that's true. which I think was
like a 20% time project that then blew
up in Brazil.
>> Totally. No. No. Yeah. Okay. So, there
was a Turkish engineer who worked for
Google named Orchet Botton and his
passion was social networking and Fster
was a thing at the time. And so January
before Gmail, before the Google IPO,
before Facebook launches on the Harvard
campus, in his 20% time, he uh launches
a social network within Google called
Orchet. And it didn't become that big in
America, but it got at its peak, I
think, 300 million users. It was the
biggest social network in Brazil, the
biggest social network in India.
>> Wow.
>> And Google was like, I don't know, it
doesn't seem that important.
>> All right. So, Open Social in 2007,
Google Wave in 2009. By the way, can we
just pause and say 2009, this is like
right after Chrome, right after Android.
Google is a big place and Google is a
siloed place at this point. I mean, it
it's kind of crazy that Android is
happening over in this other building
and there's this like fight with Apple
and that's the same time that they're
doing Google Wave. Like, it's weird that
this is all sort of concurrent. The
company was focused in a lot of
different directions,
>> but it was so decentralized that it
actually worked
>> well. It worked early.
>> Yeah,
>> it worked really well to get all this
stuff off the ground.
>> It was so interesting doing the research
for this episode because so many of the
people we talked to, even people who
were leaders of a lot of these products
because Google was so decentralized and
so siloed, they were focused on their
thing on Android or Chrome or whatever.
And so we'd ask, you know, what was the
overall strategy? what was the through
line to all of this? And we kept getting
answers of like, well, it was just
googly. People worked on what they
thought was cool and it was good for the
web. And like that is absolutely true,
but there was this all overlay of this
very, very thin layer of strategy that
held the whole web together.
>> I think that the strategy was pretty
tight at the top level and they just
didn't actually need to communicate it
down very far. Like most people that I
talked to said, I don't know, I was just
trying to build great products that
people love. I think it was a feature,
not a bug is what I'm saying that it
didn't communicate down because it let
the teams below build really, really
great products.
>> Yep. And never really think about how is
this going to help the ads business and
that was okay.
>> Yep.
>> So, Wave failed because really nobody
knew what to use it for despite a
dazzling and wonderful first
introductory video. Buzz then in 2010
that created this big privacy debacle
right at launch. It was super shortlived
that shut down. So then in 2010 Ers Hoa
very senior Google at this point
probably distinguished engineer senior
vice president
>> yeah the guy who created the distributed
infrastructure
>> right after the buzz failure he is
inspired to write this memo kind of like
the Bill Gates 1995 internet memo
there's a sea change going on the
internet is becoming more people
oriented social media could be a problem
for us the social media challenge
requires a decisive been substantial
response involving a significant
deployment of personnel right away.
Essentially, the internet was now
starting to organize around people in
this web 2.0 era, not just pages and
applications, the things that were sort
of the domain of Google. And so, here's
where I want to pause, David, and I'm
going to take it in a little bit
different direction than I think you're
probably expecting, which is so
therefore they went after Facebook. I
think it's a little bit more related to
the palace intrigue at Google
>> and a little bit less on the nail
strategic. So
>> if you zoom out and look at the company
right now, it's pretty fragmented. It's
got different fftoms with big
personalities at the top of each of
these FFTs. Android, Chrome, search,
YouTube, developer relations, trying to
sort of will a Google platform into
existence. Different products with kind
of competing goals. Ultimately, they all
help Google's overarching mission, but
there's a lot of elbows starting to come
out. Android was its own FFTM, totally
off on its own island, fighting an
existential battle. Chrome is starting
to do the same stuff as Android. They're
building their own operating system.
It's not clear what belongs in an
Android camp versus a Chrome camp and
Sundar hasn't unified them yet. Search
very protected, separate team,
especially the core people doing search
ranking and monetization. No one touches
them. YouTube is totally separate. Gmail
is massive and it really is the only one
in 200910 at the company that owns
identity since it's the only Google
property that you actually have to log
into. YouTube has its own entirely
different username and password system.
It's a mess, right? It's a complete
mess. So Larry's sensing this. He's not
CEO at the time, but he's realizing the
company's all over the place. He decides
he's just going to come back and get the
company on track. And so I think
Plus is kind of just the thing he picked
as the single thing to try to galvanize
and unify the company around. And no
matter what they picked and how they
executed it, it was going to create a
lot of carnage.
>> I can buy that.
>> There was a big shift that needed to
happen in one way, shape, or form. And
Google+ ended up kind of being the ugly
thing they did.
>> Yeah. A recentralizing of authority, so
to speak, within the company.
>> Right. So in May 2010, they get the top
50 people at Google's leadership
assembled to discuss what to do.
>> The argument for this is this is more of
a convenient crisis.
>> Yeah. model
>> and it might be a real crisis also, but
it's also exactly what you're saying,
David. So, officially then in January
2011, Google announces Larry Pageige
will return as CEO in a few months that
April. Right away, Larry moves his
office into what would become the plus
building. Wow. Yep. So, they had just
come out of this chapter. They've got
this amazing business. The whole Chrome
and Bing thing was defense against
Microsoft. Android was defense against
Apple and Microsoft. and Google+ is now
defense against Facebook.
>> Yep.
>> And legitimately, you could imagine a
world where social ends up becoming way
more important and the only places to
put ads and the places where people are
asking for information and there was
rumors for a long time Facebook was
going to build a search engine. You have
the attention, you can hijack it and do
other stuff with it.
>> These were walled gardens. Facebook was
a walled garden. Google search couldn't
index what happened inside of Facebook,
>> right? And so, yeah, you could see how
this is an existential threat. Like, the
traffic is growing. Like, oh my gosh,
what if this becomes AOL all over again,
>> right? And that's the main thing. One
tier down from that is Facebook doesn't
even allow other ad servers.
>> At least with AOL, we could do a deal
with them and power their monetization.
Facebook just hired Cheryl Samberg.
They're doing this themselves.
>> They're doing it all inhouse closed loop
system.
>> Yep.
>> So, Google+, what was Plus and how did
it get built? So, it was a one-year
sprint following this point, the 50
getting together, and it was built in a
very, very ungooy way. It was not
organic, David, like these passion
projects you're talking about.
>> It was instilled from on high down upon
all of the products.
>> It was not based on a core technical
insight. It was not consensus driven. It
was top- down command and control style
led by the person that you mentioned
earlier, Vic Gondotra. Now, who was
Vicond Doorra?
>> Vic was this interesting character. Like
we said earlier, he had been leading
Google's developer efforts in the
pre-Android days
>> and he was sort of the frontman. He was
the MC at Google IO,
>> right? If you were looking for somebody
to communicate and push down this new
top down vision across the company, he
would be a logical choice.
>> Yes. I don't know if he raised his hand.
I don't know if Larry said, "Hey, I
really think you should do this on our
behalf." But what is definitely true is
it became Vic's thing and Eric and Larry
and Sergey stepped back and let Vic run
with it. And he was given an enormous
amount of institutional authority.
>> And we should say too, you alluded to
this earlier, what was Plus? It wasn't
just a social product in and of itself.
It was baked into all Google. It was
inserted into every other product that
Google had. There's a quote from Vic to
the press at the time about this about
what Google+ is. He says, "This is the
next generation of Google. It is Google
plus one." Oh boy. Oh boy.
>> There's a lot of these even saying that.
>> Oh, gives me the heebiejibbies. So yeah,
it was a Facebook style thing, but its
goal in addition to being a Facebook
style thing was to leverage all of
Google's assets and make all Google
things Google+ things. So they moved big
headcounts out of each team and onto the
Google+ team. They reached deep to
integrate with these other products and
it's very clear who the boss was in all
these negotiations. You had a clear
mandate like your job this half year,
this year is do these plus integrations.
>> Yeah. your OKR. Google famously ran on
OKRs was now all about plus pluses.
>> And Danny Kitton, who would go on to
become the managing editor at Techrunch,
at this point in time was a Google
intern. And he wrote about it later. And
he said, "Due to this integration, much
of it was forced. The culture around the
company at Google had become deeply
poisonous by the time I started. I still
remember talking to one member of the
Picassa team, who is Google's photo
repository that they bought, who told me
to f off when I asked about integrating
plus into the product. He was hardly the
only one. Companywide bonuses were based
on the success of Google+. They even
went so far as to put little plus one
buttons on mobile advertisements like
those little banner ads at the bottom.
>> Yes. This is the best. Google had bought
ADM mob.
>> Yes.
>> And the mobile display ad units.
>> You could plus one it. Who the hell
wants to plus one an ad? I mean, this is
like Facebook's like button but plus's
version. And they're like any Google
thing should be plus oneable. So they
even reached into YouTube comments and
YouTube comments became Google+ posts.
>> I mean they almost killed the golden
goose,
>> right? They almost killed all of these
golden goosees that they had.
>> Yes. And so plus from a product
perspective, it wasn't just Facebook.
They brought a lot of really interesting
ideas. Google Hangouts came out of this.
Google Photos came out of this. There
were these things called sparks. I mean,
they really rethought a lot of social
networking. The issue is nobody really
wanted to rethink social networking.
That was a Google priority to get people
to use this, not a user-driven one. And
they tried to essentially put rocket
fuel on to scale something that really
didn't have product market fit. Well, I
really think the key huge mistake with
Google Plus, one of the huge mistakes
with Google+ was
>> you don't need a Facebook when there's
already Facebook.
>> Not even that, Facebook was already
dying. Mark Zuckerberg had already
realized that the future of social was
not what it looked like at this point in
time. M
>> as Google is launching Google+
>> in 2011 June 2011
>> 2011 2012 2013 these were the big years
for Google+ what is Mark Zuckerberg
doing he's buying
>> Instagram
>> he's buying WhatsApp and he's remaking
essentially you know Facebook into what
meta would become of like hey what we
used to think of as social networking
has bifrocated into two things public
media
i.e you know, YouTube, Instagram, UGC,
and private messaging. And here's Google
>> launching, I kid you not, this is the
craziest thing, desktop first
>> with a desktop only UI to arrange your
friends into circles.
>> Circles. That's right. Circles.
>> Which is on its own, it's such a
computer science way of thinking about
it. Oh, my friends are in sometimes
overlapping, sometimes not overlapping
groups that I want to carefully label so
that I can identify deterministically
who I want to share what with,
>> right? Nobody wants to do that.
>> Yeah. Here's the thing that just leapt
out to me about plus. This was Google's
Windows Longhorn/ Windows Vista. In our
Microsoft saga, we talked about how
Vista/Longhorn was the most damaging
thing to the company because of the
distraction and the siphoning of
resources and the best talent away from
working on what really mattered. Now the
question I was asking myself and others
in research of okay what were the
negative consequences of that? So like
with Microsoft it was clear Google who
was the negative consequence like the
whole reason Microsoft let Google fester
from their perspective for all these
years and didn't kneecap them was they
were tied up with all the distraction
from Vista
>> and losing relevance with developers
because they keep selling them a
platform that kept not shipping and then
when it eventually did ship it wasn't
good
>> right so then I was sort of trying to
figure out like okay what what are the
similar consequences for Google of the
Plus era. And at first, I couldn't
really think of any. I was like, "Oh,
well, Android's pretty good. YouTube's
pretty good. Chrome's pretty good.
Search is still pretty good. Gemini AI
comes out later. It's all pretty good."
But there were two things.
>> Messaging probably. I bet in a a non
plus world, WhatsApp, something like
that could be owned by Google.
>> Yeah. Two things. One is messaging.
Totally missed messaging. So when I was
a business school student at Stanford,
Eric was now executive chairman and he
started co-eing a class at GSB and I
took his class. I was one of his
students during these years. It was
awesome. It was one of the best classes
I ever took.
>> And the quarter when I was taking the
class was when Facebook bought WhatsApp.
And I remember
>> Eric coming into class right after it
happened and just being like, "God damn
it, we missed it. We totally missed it."
It's because Google was distracted. So
that was one thing. And then I realized
the other as bigger or bigger thing is
cloud. Google should have been massively
investing in cloud. And there were all
sorts of reasons that they did. We're
going to save this for the next episode,
but I was like, yeah, especially think
about where the impetus for this came
from from this memo, the zquake memo as
it's known. Should have been focused on
cloud.
he should not have been focused on
social and Google had the wrong strategy
in cloud for many years and as a result
that's why their cloud business is way
behind Amazon and Microsoft
>> and maybe they turned some talent maybe
there was some good people that got
burned by the culture sort of souring
you could argue this destroyed product
velocity
>> so like people complain today that
Google's always working on really
interesting technology and they just
never get cool products out the door
That is by far the biggest complaint you
hear about Google from
>> slow and big and bureaucratic and
>> yep folks on the inside and outside
these days is just like too slow and
Yeah. Yeah. That's probably the biggest
negative consequences.
>> Maybe you could trace that here.
>> I bet you can cuz think about it before
this we just spent this whole episode
talking about all these amazing things
they were building and shipping and
acquiring and transforming
>> until Gemini and arguably that's a I
actually don't know where Gemini stacks.
Is it a third place product? Still a
question mark.
>> Until Gemini, what great breakthrough
consumer service did they launch after
Google+?
>> I got nothing.
>> O.
>> Yeah,
>> that's pretty wild.
>> After having this incredible 10-year
run,
>> and there was a lot of stuff they tried.
I think some things for Android users.
Think about Google Now that predated
Google Assistant, maybe Google Home.
>> These are not worldchanging products,
>> right? It's funny. The thing that I keep
thinking about from the Google+ failure
is this big existential Facebook threat
they were worried about. I mean there
was a strategy memo in 2013 where Neil
Mohan said there is a risk that Facebook
becomes the starting point of the
internet. Google knew social was the
future and tried to win it. But
interestingly they didn't and they've
been fine.
>> Right. Right. Right. It was all totally
fine.
>> And Facebook was really freaked out too
that Google was going to come in and win
it. I mean, Google was like this giant
and Facebook was recently public going
through their own problems. So, even
though it was kind of like a nothing
burger and plus was a footnote in
history, both companies were completely
allin on this is the big battle and
ultimately Google wasn't a credible
threat to Facebook and
>> Facebook went in a different direction
anyway.
>> Facebook went in a different direction.
Yeah. So, it's almost like the end of
Burn After Reading. Have you Have you
ever seen that movie?
>> No. I won't spoil anything, but the
feeling you have at the end is you just
watched all this crazy stuff happen and
you're like, whoa, wait, did any of that
matter? That's how Google+ feels to me.
>> Yeah.
>> Funny. Plus did have two great surviving
products. Hangouts, which became Meet,
and Photos.
>> Yep. Photos is a billion user product
today.
>> Wow. Huge. The biggest thing and I think
this is like kind of getting back to my
original postulate of never waste a
crisis. You know what we have today?
Google accounts.
>> Yep.
>> You know what Google is today? It's one
company. It's not these little thiefs
here and there of different people
amassing power and building things in
different ways. I mean, I'm sure there's
still plenty of that. Everything about
Google got more unified from this era.
they have a failed product and a smoking
crater to show for it, but a unified
look across all their products, a
unified login that would, I think, be
pretty important for them going forward.
Anyway, my snarky finish on all this is
it's tempting to say Google lost in
social because this giant smoking
creator, but actually all of social
ended up pivoting to either look like
messaging or like YouTube. Anyway,
YouTube is kind of the winning paradigm
in quote unquote social media in UGC
media.
>> Yep.
>> So, they should have just done nothing
and just watched the money printer go
burr.
>> Yep.
To put a bow on it, uh, Vic ends up
leaving the company in 2014. In 2019,
they finally shut Plus down. There's a
blog post about it. They cite like a big
security breach as the reason like, "Oh,
no. We've discovered there's this huge
security vulnerability. Thus, we need to
shut down all of Google+.
>> Dude, it's so bad. There's been 50
Google products that all sound kind of
the same. They launched this one called
Currents at one point and when they shut
Plus down, this is horrible. Many people
wrote like articles as posts on Google+
and they're just gone.
>> Yeah, that's right. Actually, it was
sort of an impediment to doing some of
the research for this episode because
these posts are gone.
>> So, if you go to plus.google.com/
google.com/
anything. It just redirects you to
Google Currents. However, Google
Currents has now been shut down. So, it
is a Google Workspace blog post
announcing the Currents shutdown. Every
time you click any Google+ link anywhere
on the web, you go to a blog post that
tells you about the shutdown of
currents. That's the most googly thing.
>> Ah,
>> they got to do a better job with those.
Well, by 2015,
>> it's our last section, the bridge to
Alphabet.
>> Yeah, it's clear it's time for a new era
at Google. The company announces that it
is reinventing itself, is becoming an
entirely different company. Google is
becoming Alphabet in August of 2015. And
Larry Pageige will be the CEO of this
new Alphabet holding company. Sundar
Pachai will be the CEO of Google, which
will be by far the largest and really
primary operating company within
Alphabet. Interestingly, they didn't at
all decide to split up YouTube or any of
the products and yeah, that's they just
spent all these years unifying it all.
That's all Google.
>> They broke out Google X.
>> Yes, Google X. They broke out. Whimo is
still part of X at this point in time
that would later spin out is now part of
Alphabet on its own. But the other bets
including an Alphabet really quite
clever the nomenclature here. Yes.
>> Uh were Nest that they had just
acquired, Google Fiber, Calico and
Verily their two health companies Google
X Lab and then Google Ventures and
Capital G the two investing entities
that they had. So you know then really
the question is like okay well why did
they do this? But why did Larry become
CEO of Alphabet? Why did Sundar become
CEO of Google?
>> I think this kind of had to happen as
like a healing after
>> plus. Sununar was a leader who had real
cred going back to the early days and
with Chrome and with Android, like the
core
>> great products, two of these core great
products, platforms that we've talked
about the whole episode
>> that have really driven the Google
flywheel all along. Interestingly, he
had never worked in search or ads,
>> right? But these were the platforms that
had shoehorned Google into the mobile
era and protected it from its greatest
existential threat and just also
Sundar's personality. I think was a way
to reunify the company and bring
everybody back together.
>> Definitely strikes me as a peacemaker
among big egos.
>> Yes.
And that is where we're going to leave
Alphabet/Google
for the moment. Ben, give us a sense of
how big this company had gotten.
>> So, at the end of 15, it's gotten huge.
It's 75 billion in revenue. 52 billion
of that is first party sites, Google
websites, Adwords, Gmail, Maps. 15
billion, the the smaller part is over in
doubleclick AdSense land. And actually,
that's pretty low margin revenue. So
again, the lion share in Google
websites. YouTube is profitable at this
point and their bottom line operating
income. Google did about $23 billion in
operating income and their other bets at
this point lost about 3.5 billion. Their
other bets are extremely interesting and
will be the focus of our next episode.
But the big takeaway here, the business
was still in 2015 and essentially is
still today search ads.
>> Yep. And what so strikes me listening to
you say those numbers in 2015, a they're
huge, but also Google is so much bigger
today on these same businesses with this
same business model,
>> right?
>> There was another 5x scaling to go over
the next 10 years.
>> Yes, it's crazy.
>> Google back then was like 20% the size
of Google now. And nothing has basically
changed when it comes to the business
model and products. I mean, nothing's
changed since 2002,
>> right? Well, I think this era, what we
talked about all the episode, all the
hits were stewarding that business
through these sea changes,
>> but nothing has changed about what the
core business is. It just turned out
that that seed of an that search ads
actually scaled to the biggest market in
the world.
>> Yep. All right. Just like the last
episode with Gmail at the end, I've got
one little koda, one little teaser for
next time. Great,
>> Ben. What if I told you that between
2015 and 2016, so this next year, this
next 12 months after the Alphabet
transition,
all of the following people were Google
employees.
Alex Kresevki of AlexNet,
the dawn of machine learning, AI. uh his
PhD adviser Jeff Hinton the godfather of
AI his collaborator on the AlexNet paper
Ilia Skekkever
founding scientist of open AI Dario
Amade co-founder with his sister of
anthropic Andre Karpathy
until recently chief AI scientist at
Tesla Chris Ola Nome Shazir Ian
Goodfellow Hello. And of course, the
co-founders of DeepMind, which Google
acquired in 2014, Dennis Hassabis, Shane
Le, and Mustafa Sullean. Mustafa runs AI
at Microsoft today. Andrew from
Stanford, Quac Lee, Oral Vignales, and
oh yeah, in addition to all of those
people, the authors of the transformer
paper because
Google invented the transformer and
published the paper in June of 2017,
>> right? Which is the novel mechanism that
all LLMs today from every big
foundational model research lab is based
on. When I was talking to folks in the
research for this episode and AI came
up, one of them said, you know, I have
to remind people when I'm talking to
partners out in the ecosystem that the T
in chat GPT
stands for transformer and that we
invented that
because it is also during this time
while Ilia is working at Google that he
poses the question to his research
colleagues and the Google brain team
that is working on all of
Gosh, what do you guys think if we just
built one really, really, really big
neural network and we set it loose with
training data on the entire internet,
which by the way, of course, we can do
here at Google because uh you know,
thanks to the combination of the search
index, we index the entire internet and
all the products that we just talked
about on this whole episode, we have all
this data
>> and all this content out there. If we
did that, do you think it would learn
everything?
>> Well, David, that feels like quite the
groundwork for the next episode.
>> That feels like a story for next time.
Yeah.
But through that lens, there is another
way to view everything that happens at
Google during this 10-year period we
just discussed, which is that they're
just collecting all the access, all the
information, and all the talent for AI.
>> It's nuts. There's this whole other
world of research. Who would be the
people that would drive the next decade
or five decades of change? And they
basically had them all in one place at
one time. They were all employees of
Google. So I want to end with one more
quote. This time from Larry Page all the
way back in the year 2000. This is Larry
talking in the year 2000.
Artificial intelligence would be the
ultimate version of Google. So if we had
the ultimate search engine, it would
understand everything on the web. It
would understand exactly what you wanted
and it would give you the right thing.
That's obviously artificial intelligence
to be able to answer any question
basically because almost everything is
on the web, right? We're nowhere near
doing that now. However, we can get
incrementally closer to that and that is
basically what we work on and that's
tremendously interesting from an
intellectual standpoint. We have all
this data. If you printed out our index,
it would be 70 miles high now. We have
all this computation. We have about
6,000 computers. This is 25 years ago.
We have enough disk space to store like
a 100 copies of the whole web. So, you
have a really interesting confluence of
a lot of different things. A lot of
computation, a lot of data that didn't
used to be available. And from an
engineering and scientific standpoint,
building things that make use of this is
a really interesting intellectual
exercise. So I expect we'll be working
on that for a while.
Incredible. This is 25 years ago that he
said this.
>> Amazing.
>> All right. Should we do some analysis?
>> Let's do some analysis.
>> All right. Let's do power. And for those
who are new listeners, power is the
section where we analyze which of the
seven powers does Google have from
Hamilton Helmer's framework that enables
a business to achieve persistent
differential returns or be more
profitable than their nearest competitor
and do so sustainably. Google is very
very weird to analyze for this because
most of the way you think about Google
is actually not where the economic
transaction is. If you want to analyze
the business, it is why are advertisers
spending a marginal dollar with Google
versus spending it elsewhere. And Google
has the seven powers that show up in
numerous instances all over their
business. But I think the interesting
way for us to do this analysis, David,
is let's look at each one. Just assume
Google has them all and say where is the
biggest or a very large example in our
mind of where each of them show up.
>> Great. I like that. So
counterpositioning
typically doesn't show up for incumbents
for large companies.
>> This is the exception though with
Google,
>> right? Where you just look at their sort
of new businesses for example in this
episode talking about Android. They
massively counterpositioned against
Microsoft, the less than free business,
>> less than free business model. I mean
this is the clearest example of
counterpositioning I think that has ever
existed. Oh hey, my competitors require
you to pay them. How about I pay you
instead?
>> Right? And my competitors can't do that
because they don't have the business
model of advertising based on search
such that they can justify doing this
>> right scale economies especially as
they're adding all these apps all these
users across all this surface area. Now,
if you're an advertiser and you want to
reach users, you know, across search or
display or video, you like Google is a
one-stop shop,
>> right? You don't have to sort of
independently spend operational time and
headcount on all these different
platforms. You sort of get the one
>> and that's not even to mention the scale
economies on the infrastructure side we
talked about last time or like I mean
they show up in every business here, but
like that's just one example. And the
fact that the more advertisers there are
and the more users there are, the more
profit Google makes because each little
individual auction on every individual
search finds a maximal price.
>> Yes. Network economies. YouTube.
Hello. More creators, more viewers.
Creators make money from having views of
their videos.
>> Application developers on Android and
users on Android. the two-sided network
economies there. Yes, everywhere. Not to
mention, in the core business too, in
search, more users searching is more
valuable to me as an advertiser because
I have a deeper pool of people I can
advertise to. So, I can just deploy more
dollars on your channel if it's working.
>> Yep. Switching cost. How about Gmail?
Oh, I've got my last uh 20 years of
email history in Gmail all stored for
free. Uh yeah, I'm not switching. In the
core business, there's not as much
switching costs. I suppose there's a
little bit of, oh, because I've spent a
lot of money, the targeting is very good
at allocating my spend, but the
switching costs in the core business for
an advertiser are not as prominent as
other powers. I don't think I continue
to spend on Google because it's hard to
switch. I continue to spend on Google
because they have all the high intent
users for products other than, you know,
Amazon. That's one of the two big search
boxes in the world where people type in
when they want to buy a product. So, I'm
going to advertise there. Has little to
do with switching costs, I think.
>> Yeah. But for users of Gmail,
>> oh, and several of the other products
like enormous
>> for users all across the board. Yeah. I
won't leave YouTube at this point. The
algorithm's dialed to my interests.
>> Oh, yeah. That's a great point of
switching costs of the algorithm on
YouTube.
>> Yeah.
>> Branding. I think in the heyday of
Google that we're talking about in this
episode when they're launching all these
incredible products, yes, these
products, one because they're incredible
and because they were free, but also
like there was such a halo around the
company, like if there was a new Google
product, I would be chomping at the bit
to go try it.
>> Yeah, that's super true. I remember I
was desperate for Google Wave invites.
The product completely failed, but I was
completely dazzled by it and I was
desperate to get invite and access. The
Google name meant something. Yep.
>> And still does, by the way, which I
think held them back in AI for a while.
They know the Google name means
something, so they are reticent to to
throw their name on it until they got
kind of shoved off the cliff.
>> Yep. Cornered resource.
Yes. Well, certainly heading into the AI
era now. YouTube, the YouTube catalog
you can train on.
>> Yeah.
>> All the data they have.
>> Yeah. It's funny. Yeah. I was about to
say their infrastructure, but I think
that's actually a scale economy that
they've built out the infrastructure
they have so they can run all their
products as cheaply as they can.
>> Yep. I think the infrastructure is also
a process power.
>> Yeah.
>> In that in the era we've been talking
about, they could launch all these
products on their infrastructure just
way cheaper than anyone else.
>> You know what's a corner resource? They
have built internal software and systems
that is better than what is available
outside of Google.
>> Great point. A lot of the time they even
create open- source projects that are
similar to their internal stuff, but
they don't actually give away the
internal stuff. Inside Google, they
still run Borg. They run far less
Kubernetes than they run Borg. And Borg
is part of the secret sauce.
>> Yeah. When you talk to engineers who've
left Google, they miss the
infrastructure.
>> So Google has it all.
>> And we can name a lot more examples, but
we got to go.
>> All right. Playbook.
>> All right. I tried to get most of them
in as we were going in the story. The
first is that Google really wanted to
become a platform company and I was sort
of noodling on did they ever do this
successfully. And David, we sort of
touched on this idea that they are
advancing the platform of the web
without owning the platform of the web.
So if they didn't have Android, how
would you answer the question, is Google
a platform company?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
I would say it's sort of like a shadow
platform company. It's like an ecosystem
company,
>> right? And even with Android, okay,
great. They own the target development
platform. Their money is still made
elsewhere. It's not a platform business.
They may have a platform orientation as
a company. They build a bunch of stuff
that for developers to build their
applications on top of, but where their
bread is buttered is really as an
advertising company. It's important when
push really comes to shove on big
strategic decisions the company has to
make.
>> Yeah.
>> Like Apple pure play platform company.
Microsoft pure play platform company.
They either sell software or hardware
and then they need the platform around
it to bolster their sales. Google's very
indirect.
>> Yep.
>> All right. So that was one. The other
one is they make tons of small
acquisitions famously. I mean that that
run in the 2010s. Aside from the big
ones from YouTube, from Android, from
double click, from ADM Mob, there was
also what became Google groups,
spreadsheets, Docs, Blogger. They bought
Applied Semantics with the patents and
some of the tech for AdSense. They
bought the technology for Google Maps.
They bought Urchin for Google Analytics,
Dodgeball, Feed Burner, Recapture,
Slide, Jambool, Like.com, Widevine,
Admeld, Punched, Zaget, Sparrow, Wavy. I
mean like I could just keep going. Oh
yeah, there are hundreds of companies
they bought. In talking to folks in the
research, there was this amazing part of
Google culture that also fit the
strategy perfectly of help the web and
the rich web and web apps bloom. Come
work at Google with these incredible
people, meet your co-founders, go start
a startup, leave Google,
>> right?
>> We will then reacquire you back into
Google in a couple years.
>> It happened dozens or hundreds of times.
I remember seeing this happen from the
outside and thought Google is nuts to
let this happen. But I realize now, no,
this was all part of the strategy.
>> Yeah,
>> it's all good for the web.
>> Yep. You can run very indirect,
generous, long-term strategies like that
with a money printer like AdWords.
>> Yes,
>> I know I keep coming back to that, but
that is at the core of what drives
everything. This one's a little bit less
playbook, but just an observation. I
watched the Google IO keynote with Glass
and I watched a bunch of Glass content.
I even back in the day at a startup
weekend launched a Google Glass app.
>> Oh, nice.
>> So, after watching all this Glass
content, and it's the butt of every joke
now, Meta Ray-B bands and Google Glass
are the same thing feature-wise.
>> Yep.
>> The gestures on the side, the fact that
it could take a photo. I mean, Google
Glass was a little more advanced. could
run these like very basic text based
apps, but I'm sure when Meta launches
their little hologram version of the
glasses, that's going to be eerily
similar. So, like, of course, you could
say, "Oh, it's just timing." But here's
the thing. Google's made you look like a
cyborg. Metas is for normal people. And
there is no better metaphor for the
cultural difference between Facebook and
Google than this.
Google's a bunch of wacky academics who
did not really understand why this would
make the product fail. Facebook is
founded on the idea that you're trying
to be cool.
>> Yeah. And went and did a partnership
with SLO Exotica to get the tech Yes.
>> into glasses that normal people wear.
>> Yes. It was crazy watching these demos
because I'm like these are the meta AR
demos. It just happens to have a cool
factor versus not.
>> Yeah. And then my last one is this idea
that they did figure out a way
culturally to get people amped about
just build great products. Figure out
how to do something really hard from an
engineering perspective that ends up
being really useful and ship things that
people love. It's not that you didn't
have to think about a business model,
but a lot of the time for many years
after launching a product, you really
didn't.
>> Yep. It's like we talked about earlier,
there was this thin layer of really,
really, really tight, really great
strategy that was just like a few people
at the top of the company, but below
that was just make a great product.
>> Yes. All right. I've got two for
playbook. One that I'm going to make my
quintessence. Just want to underscore
again, we said this in the Android
chapter, but like Android was the mother
of all wins. It was so big to win with
Android.
Nobody stretches a business model across
technology eras. Nobody. And Google did
it
>> in a dominant way where they are they
are the dominant company in the next era
as well.
>> Yeah. It is the Google version of Azure
from our Microsoft series. It absolves
any and all sins. Not that there were
many at Google. The only one was plus.
The only way it could have gone better
is if instead of launching Android, they
launched the iPhone and they also got
the iPhone profits rather than just some
small dollars that protected their core
business.
>> Yep. That was my playbook. And then my
quintessence is it is wild that this one
company has eight products with over a
billion users and started this era with
just one search that didn't even have a
billion users yet.
search, Android, Chrome, YouTube, Gmail,
Maps, Drive, Photos, and then if you
count the Play Store as separate from
Android, which Google does, I think
that's a bit of a stretch, but if you
do, then they have nine products with
over a billion users. And just for
context, Meta is the next highest count
of products in one company with over a
billion users. They have four, the Blue
app, WhatsApp, Instagram, and Messenger.
Metal likes to claim they have five.
They like to say that Meta AI in
aggregate has over a billion users
embedded across all their products.
>> Yeah. But this whole super intelligence
thing is an admission that the active
users of Meta AI is a little uh
stretchy.
>> If the Play Store doesn't really count
on its own, the Meta AI for sure doesn't
really count on its own. So Meta has
four.
>> Apple I think only has three, maybe
four. So, the three Apple has for sure
are iPhone, iMessage, and Safari.
iPad, maybe? I don't think so. Mac,
definitely not.
>> I basically don't count any iPhone app
because they all come for free when you
get the phone.
>> Okay. So, by your definition, Apple has
one with iPhone.
>> I think Apple has one.
>> Okay. All right.
>> Let's take that same definition. How
many of these came for free at Google?
Google search, Android, those are two
completely different distribution
channels. Chrome.
>> Yep. I don't think any of these came for
free.
>> I mean, Google helped Chrome.
>> No. Yeah. These are all independently
have achieved billion plus users.
>> Gmail and Google Drive sort of advantage
each other. So, I think you can sort of
subtract one of those out.
>> Yeah. But it's not to the extent that
iMessage is default with an iPhone,
>> right? Maps is advantaged by Android.
They ship a whole lot of maps. So, but
probably whatever the phone was would
have a great Google Maps app.
>> Yep. Okay. All right. I buy it. Apple
has one. Microsoft has two. Windows and
LinkedIn. Amazon doesn't have any
billion user products. Google's got
eight. Like, that's incredible.
>> Call it seven or six. I think it's
reasonable to subtract.
>> Okay, fine.
>> But still, that's exactly right.
>> Whatever. That's my point. This is my
quintessence. This period at Google is a
run like nobody's ever had.
>> Yeah, absolutely right.
>> All right, what you got?
>> So, quintessence for me is the thing
that I sort of can't stop thinking about
from the episode and I decided this time
I knew what it was going in and I
decided to hide it all the way until the
end. So, we haven't talked about this
thing yet.
>> Oh, okay. Almost all of Google's
successful products are based on a core
technology insight that is underneath
the whole thing.
>> The type of insight that could be in an
academic journal.
>> Yep.
>> Someone told me this and I've been using
it as a little litmus test for will a
product work or not. And as you look
through I mean you look at the original
search that is by definition the page
rank algorithm. It's a core technology
insight.
>> I mean, they published it as an academic
paper.
>> The way that the ad-based auction works
is a core, it's almost mechanical in its
elegance and its brilliance and its
simplicity. It is a technology insight
that and everything we talked about in
Google part one, our first episode. Then
you look at everything that succeeded
this episode. Gmail, the way that they
are able to do the gigabyte of storage,
Ajax, fast responsive web application.
You look at maps and docs with real-time
collaboration, breakthrough core
technology insight.
>> Yeah,
>> YouTube. Uh,
>> yeah, totally.
>> Y
>> serving video on demand to the entire
world.
>> Absolutely.
>> Being able to scale that and make it a
real going concern. Chrome, four core
technology insights, maybe six, maybe
seven in the original comic.
>> Yep.
>> Android. I can't name one magical core
insight. This one may kind of be the
exception cuz like, yeah, it's
technically hard and all that, but
there's not like an elegant thing that's
the reason that Android succeeded. It
was perfect execution in a lot of ways
strategically, distribution, marketing,
partnerships.
>> Okay. Wait, no, no. I I got what it is.
It's the same thing as the iPhone. It
was an incredible achievement to
wrestle OS 10 into iOS and to get it to
run on a battery powered mobile device
that fit in your pocket. And Android did
the same thing with Linux. They wrestled
Linux into a batterypowered mobile
device that fits in your pocket.
>> Yep. less of an elegant satisfying core
insight I think and not the reason that
it worked. I mean not the reason why
Android unlike these other ones there's
a clear line between the it's almost
like the Google products that succeed
wildly organically
except for Android are ones where
there's almost no product the technology
solution is just so incredible that it
is directly the user experience and you
get the technology breakthrough as the
experience.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I I sort of see where you're
going.
>> But then look at the other ones.
Google+, Google Wave, these are like
products. These are like user
experiences that people come up with
that don't necessarily have a
breakthrough technology underneath them.
Google Photos is actually quite the
opposite. All of the AI stuff that's
been happening on Google Photos for a
very long time, that's why it worked.
Like people wanted all these incredible
magic features that come with Google
Photos. It's funny as someone told me
this in the research. It was been sort
of batting around in my head and then
I'm reading Eric Schmidt's book and Eric
Schmidt said he would ask PMs, "What is
your core technical insight that makes
it all work?" And if there wasn't a good
answer, he wouldn't fund the project.
They figured this out at Google, too.
>> It's a googly thing that this genius
technology is the product itself. And if
you try to craft some cool idea that you
have that is not just directly
translating tech breakthrough,
it's not going to be the type of product
that succeeds at Google. They don't know
how. Some people can make an Instagram
and those people are not Google.
>> Yep. Ironic that Kevin was a earthw
Google employee who left to start a
startup.
>> Yes. Anyway, I think that has made it
extremely clear to me when Google
products succeed and when they fail.
>> Love it. Spot on.
>> All right, carveouts.
>> Carveouts. I've got one and then I've
got my long awaited followup.
>> Oh my god. We've been awaiting with
baited breath. Listeners, what game
console did David buy?
>> I'm going to make everybody wait for uh
one more minute. My actual carve out for
the episode is when we were in New York
for Radio City. My whole family came,
the girls came, and we stayed for the
rest of the week after the show and we
took the girls to the Bluey experience
>> at the camp store in New York City. And
it was awesome. Lived up to
expectations, lived up to the hype. They
basically have recreated the Bluey house
in this physical space in New York City.
The house is almost a character in the
show and they have recreated it and they
just let you and your kids in to roam
free in the house. Then you have a
magical moment at the end of the
experience.
>> Ah,
>> it was cool. Highly, highly recommend if
you are in the Bluey demographic and
happen to be in New York.
>> Okay. What game console did you pick?
>> I bought the Steam Deck.
>> The Steam Deck?
>> I bought the Steam Deck and it's great.
Although I haven't, truth be told, had
much time to play it this past month
with everything we've had going on at
Radio City and then preparing this
episode. But it's great.
>> How'd you pick? What was the ultimate?
>> It ultimately came down to as much as I
desperately wanted my older daughter to
be ready to play Mario Kart with me,
she's just not. And so if you're buying
a console for just you to enjoy, you
went with the Steam Deck.
>> Yeah. I was like, I would probably enjoy
the Steam Deck more. And
>> do you endorse it? Do you recommend it?
>> Yeah. What Valve has done with the Steam
Deck, I didn't realize until buying it
and using it is incredible. They have
abstracted a PC gaming machine into a
console experience. So, I've always
liked PC type games, but I haven't been
a PC gamer in many, many years cuz like
I'm not going to build a gaming machine
or even you could just buy one, but like
I don't need another PC. Where am I
going to put it? What am I going to do
with it? I want the console simplicity
of just buy the damn thing, turn it on,
buy the games, play them,
>> right?
>> Valve has created that in handheld form.
It's awesome. You don't have to worry
about any of the drivers or specs. It's
really, really impressive.
>> All right, good to know.
>> So, I will buy a Switch to at some
point, probably in the next year or so,
but for now, Steam Deck. All right, what
are your carabouts?
>> I've got three.
>> Oh, great.
>> My first one, and I swear to God, this
is unrelated to their sponsorship, is
Claude.
>> Amazing. It's so great.
>> It's so good. Using AI has completely
changed the way that I prepare for these
episodes now, and I cannot imagine going
back.
>> I hear AI is a thing. I hear AI is a
thing. So, that's the first one. I just
find myself in it all day. Now, two is
the Sony RX100
VIII or 7. So, I recently bought a
different camera, the Fuji X100 VI or
the six.
>> Yeah, that's what you had in New York.
>> Yeah. And it's great. It's like the
internet's favorite camera. It has these
amazing film simulation color profiles.
It's like a camera, though. I carry it
around my neck because it's like it's a
camera that you hold and use and it's
very fun shooting 35 millimeter
equivalent. It feels like I'm taking
pictures the way that pictures were
meant to be taken.
>> It's not a full DSLR, but it is like a
big thing.
>> Exactly. It's a handheld, but I wouldn't
call it a pocket camera. Now, the funny
thing is the thing that I'm actually
talking about as my carveout is the Sony
camera. Shil Monot tweeted actually this
morning. I should have been preparing
for this episode and I was like replying
to him on Twitter instead that he's been
considering getting this Sony or another
point andoot camera and I just kind of
remembered how much I love this camera.
The Sony RX1007 fits in my pocket. It's
very small. It has a giant zoom lens for
its size and I was just looking at some
of the pictures that I've taken with it.
It's like the perfect thing to bring
with a phone. Whenever I am space
constrained, which is usually I mean I
just don't really want a camera around
my neck. The perfect combo is bring a
phone and bring the Sony. I am aware
that it's not a full-frame camera. I'm
aware that it's not as photographery as
my Fuji, but it is the most practical
one for most things that I want to do.
And for many, many shots, it is far
superior to shooting on a camera phone.
So, I don't know. I just love it. It's a
2019 camera and they really need to come
out with one that has USBC because it's
annoying to charge, but other than that,
it's just awesome. So, I highly
recommend it.
>> There you go. You're bringing it full
circle on this episode. A point and
shoot camera.
>> Point and shoot camera, especially
paired with Lightroom has this great AI
feature called D Noiseise that they
launched and is now rolled out in
production. It is incredible.
>> Love it.
>> Then I have one more last one. A
listener recently sent me. He started a
clothing company called Keraseimi and it
is an incredible garment. It is just
this like really really nice cashmere
shirt. I've been wearing it all
recording. It's great on a cool day.
It's great on a warm day. It's my
current favorite shirt. And so I wanted
to uh thank the listener that sent it to
me and say you have built a very uh the
prices are high. So very nice clothing
company but just excellent products.
Well, I I've been staring at you for the
past seven and a half hours here and
I've been thinking the whole time, God,
Ben is looking good.
>> My normal thing, if I could just wear it
every day, is a long sleeve dark crew
neck. Just like I don't have to think
about it. You can look nice in it. It
just goes with everything. It's, you
know, the sort of capsule wardrobe idea.
And this is the sort of finest version
of that that I've worn. It's really
great. Kerosimi.
>> Nice.
>> All right. With that, listeners, our
huge thanks to our partners this season.
JP Morgan Payments, trusted, reliable
payments infrastructure for your
business, no matter the scale. That's
jpmorggan.com/acquired.
Anthropic, the makers of Claude,
claude.ai/acquired.
Statsig, the best way to do
experimentation and more as a product
development team. That's
statsig.com/acquired.
And Verscell, your complete platform for
web development. and Vzero that is
versel.com/acquired.
Click the links in the show notes to
learn more. We have a bunch of people to
thank for contributing to this episode.
>> Yes. Yes, we do. Hiroshi Lockheimer, Tim
Armstrong, Sam Schillis, Hunter Walk,
Nick Fox, Shona Brown, Clay Bour, a
bunch of folks who helped a little bit
here, but more are going to be for the
next episode. Max Ross, Greg Curado,
Demisabis,
and then Ben, you had a bunch of folks
who you spoke to as well.
>> Yeah, as always, I want to thank Arvin
Navaratnam from Worldly Partners for his
excellent writeup, which you can find
linked in the show notes, and also Paul
Bkite, creator of Gmail, Bill Corin,
Jonathan Rashelle, Bradley Horowitz,
John Hanky, Ben Idolen, Esar Lipkovitz,
and Ben Leebald. And that is in addition
to as always the many folks who helped
us whose names we can't say here but
know you are appreciated.
>> Yes.
>> And thanks to all of you for listening.
>> Seriously, if you like this episode and
uh you're like, "Oh, wait. There's a
Google episode before this. Most of you
have probably listened, but if you have
not, go check out our first episode on
the origin of Google and the creation of
the search engine and the search
business. And of course, our Microsoft
series part one, part two, and an
interview with Steve Balmer.
>> If you want the other side of the story
to everything we talked about here,
>> in addition, our giant episode on Meta
is probably pretty relevant and we
reference it several times. After this
episode, check out ACQ2, our second show
where we talked to founders and CEOs
building businesses and areas that we
have covered on the show. Our last one
was with Google legends, really industry
legends, Brett Taylor and Clay Bavor
about the current state of AI and where
we are headed. So, search ACQ2 in any
podcast player. Come chat with us in the
Slack. That's acquired.fm/slack.
and join the email list for all the
excellent email goodies, including
voting on episodes for this fall.
>> Woohoo!
>> With that, listeners, we'll see you next
time.
>> We'll see you next time.
>> Who got the truth?
>> Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Who got
the truth? Huh?
[Music]